Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non- commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 



Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at http : / /books . qooqle . com/ 



The primitive 
church and the 
see of Peter 



Luke Rivington 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



The Primitive Church 

AND THE 

See of Peter 



Digitized by 



SYDNEY F. SMITH, 8 J. 

Imprimatur. 

HERBERTUS CARDINALIS VAUGHAN, 

ABCBIEPI SCOPUS WE8TMONASTEBIENSIS 

DU 19 MartU, 1894. 



Digitized by 



0 



The Primitive Church 

AND THE 

See of Peter 



BY THE REV. 

LUKE RIVINGTON, M.A. 

MAGDALEN COLLEGE, OXFORD 



WITH AN INTRODUCTION 

BY THE 

CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP OF WESTMINSTER 



LONDON 

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. 

AND NEW YORK : 15 EAST 16* STREET 
1894 

All rights rttervtd 



Digitized by 




I 



Digitized by 



INTEODUCTION 

BY THB 

CARDINAL ARCHBISHOP OF WESTMINSTER 



Or course we desire to convert all men — especially our 
own countrymen, as loving them best — to the Catholic 
Religion. Could it be otherwise P We believe the 
Catholic religion to be the one only true religion, 
founded by Jesus Christ upon the Rock. We should 
fail, then, in love for God did we not strive to extend 
His Kingdom, which is His Church upon earth ; and in 
love for our neighbour, did we not endeavour to per- 
suade him to become one of God's liegemen and a sharer 
with us in the Divine life of the Faith and of the Sacra- 
ments. It is no matter of doubt or of indifference that 
is at stake, but absolutely the most vital, the most per- 
sonal, the eternal interest of man. 

But any kind of conversion will not do. The con- 
version must be real, genuine, and based on solid 
grounds. That is to say, it must rest not only upon 
conviction, but upon a right conviction, a conviction 
rooted in the right fundamental principle. To come 
into the Catholic Church simply on account of the 
beauty of her ceremonial, the reasonableness of this or 
that set of doctrines and practices, or her venerable 
antiquity and her attractive traditions, or as a mere 




vi 



INTRODUCTION. 



refuge from persons or systems that have bred dis- 
satisfaction and distrust, is to enter the Church without 
a conviction rooted in the right fundamental principle. 
What is that principle ? Simply this : that the Catholic 
Church is the Divine Teacher, set up in the world by 
Jesus Christ, and that our attitude towards her must 
be that of a Disciple. The Disciple does not pick and 
choose according to his taste, nor, when the Divine 
Teacher is once accepted, can he be ruled by private 
judgment and understanding. Our Lord Himself shows 
us this by His own method of procedure. When 
He had announced, 4 My Mesh is meat indeed, and 
My Blood is drink indeed,' many said, ' This saying 
is hard, and who can hear it ? And after this many 
of His Disciples went back and walked no more with 
Him. Then Jesus said to the twelve, " Will you also 
go away ? " And Simon Peter answered Him, " Lord, 
to whom shall we go ? Thou hast the words of eternal 
life. We have believed and have known that Thou 
art the Christ, the Son of God"' (John vi.). Christ, 
therefore, gave no countenance to those who would 
believe only that which was agreeable to their notion 
of fitness or possibility. He gave them no explana- 
tion of how His Mesh and Blood were to be eaten 
and drunk. He demanded this, and this alone, that 
they should recognise the Divine Teacher, and having 
found Him, that they should take up their due position 
as learners or disciples. There was no compromise, 
no halting; if unwilling to accept this fundamental 
principle, the position of a Disciple, they might all go 
away, aye, even the twelve. The vital question, then, 



Digitized by 



INTRODUCTION, 



vii 



is, Where is the Divine Teacher ? Some, prompted by 
private motives, with subtilty and sophistry, evade the 
question, or answer it in a way to leave themselves 
an escape from the plain obligation of a disciple. Their 
aim is to stay as they are. To them the Church is a 
vast organisation incapable of articulate speech, or it is 
made up of branches, each of which has an independent 
voice, but without any one living, visible, audible 
authority to control the whole. 

Now it is best, in this matter, to come to close 
quarters, and to deal with a definite member of the 
Church — namely, with the Head. If the Church is 
visible at all, it must have a visible Head, at least as 
visible as the body itself. It is the essential business 
of the head to speak and direct. It controls the 
body, according to certain divine laws. It secures 
to the whole unity of thought and of action. Without 
its presence and influence the members must either 
fall into dissolution or destroy one another. Where, 
then, is the visible Head of the Catholic Church ? For 
a thousand years the English people professed, with 
one accord, the Pope to be their religious Head. They 
acknowledged one centre of authority, the See of Peter ; 
were led by one Supreme Shepherd, the successor of 
Peter ; and they were consequently united, by the pro- 
fession of the same Faith and Sacraments, in one re- 
ligion, with the whole of Christendom. 

There is one passage, so aptly setting forth the doc- 
trine of the Catholic Church, in a letter from King 
Edward H., a.d. 1314, directed to the Sacred College of 
Cardinals, during the vacancy of the Holy See, that I 



Digitized by 



viii 



INTRODUCTION. 



< 



quote it not only for its own intrinsic merit, but as 
showing the belief of the English nation. 

4 When Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God, 
had consummated the mystery of man's redemption, 
and was about to return to His Father, lest He should 
leave the flock He had bought with the price of His 
Blood bereft of the government of a shepherd, He de- 
livered over and entrusted the care of it, by an immu- 
table ordinance, to blessed Peter the Apostle, and in 
his person to his successors, the Boman Pontiffs, that 
they may govern it in succession. He willed that the 
Boman Church, who, for the time, presiding as the 
Mother and Mistress of all the faithful, holds, as it 
were, the place of God upon earth, should by salutary 
teachings direct the peoples of the said flock, scattered 
over the whole world, in the way of salvation, and 
show them at all times how they should behave them- 
selves in the house of God 9 (Wilkins, vol. ii. p. 460). 

Three hundred years earlier King Edward the Con- 
fessor notifies in a solemn charter the extraordinary 
devotion which the English people had ever had 
towards St. Peter and his successors : 4 summam devo- 
tionem quam habuit semper gens anglorum erga eum 
[Petrum] et vicarios ejus ' (Wilkins, vol. i. p. 319). 

And three hundred years before that, again, Bede 
was teaching and writing that 4 Whosoever shall separate 
himself in any way whatsoever from the unity of 
Peter's faith, and from his communion, can neither 
obtain pardon of his sins nor admission into heaven ' 
(Horn, xxvii. Giles). 

The lesson of history teaches unmistakably that the 




INTRODUCTION. 



ix 



unity of the visible Church can be preserved only by 
its normal union with its visible Head. 

The Churches, planted among different and antago- 
nistic races and tongues — for instance, the French, the 
German, the Italian, the English Churches — are all one 
in Faith and the Sacraments, through their submission 
to the See of Peter. 

So long as the spiritual authority and headship of 
the Pope was recognised by the English people, they 
remained united in creed and religion. It was not 
Canterbury, but Eome that was the source and the 
touchstone of unity. Though after the apostacy of the 
sixteenth century the names of the old sees were re- 
tained, with their accumulated wealth, their extensive 
patronage, their State protection, Canterbury and the 
rest of them were unable to hold the English people in 
unity of faith and practice for a single generation. 
Though backed up by the sovereign and the whole 
legislative power of England, and by a code of the 
most drastic penal laws, they were speedily reduced to 
the pitiable condition of seeing the people fall away 
from them in all directions. The nation that had been 
conspicuous for its religious unity during a thousand 
years became, from the moment it rejected the authority 
of the Holy See, a by- word throughout Europe for re- 
ligious rebellion and sporadic dissent. Had there 
been, as we are assured by some, no essential change 
in religion, but only a healthy reform and a purifica- 
tion from errors and abuses, how came it to pass that 
this purified and perfected religion began its career 
by falling into discredit with the people of England, 




X 



INTRODUCTION. 



and to such an extent that religious dissent has be- 
come quite as characteristic of the last 300 years in 
England, as religious unity and peace had been of all 
the preceding ages of our history? I will only add 
that the leaders of the Established Church need not 
throw the blame of this upon the English people. Had 
the various countries of the Continent, which are still 
united in one faith, withdrawn, like England, from the 
guidance of the Chief Shepherd, they too, like England, 
would long since have been similarly torn to pieces by 
religious strife and discord. 

The recent revival of Catholic doctrines and prac- 
tices in the Church of England is very wonderful. It 
is a hopeful sign. It is a testimony to the patristic 
dictum that the human mind is ' naturally Christian.' It 
exhibits a yearning, and a turning of the mind and heart 
towards the Catholic Church. It is a national clearing 
the way for something more, and is to be regarded 
as a grace from above. It may be all this ; but it is not 
yet obedience and submission to the Divine Teacher. 
A whole cycle of Catholic doctrines might be picked out 
one by one and strung together, and passionately pro- 
fessed, upon grounds of private judgment ; but that is 
not submission. It is one thing to recognise that the 
pasture is sweet and wholesome, and another thing to 
recognise and to obey the voice of the Shepherd. 
Goats may enter into the pastures of the sheep, and 
may select at will the herbs, the grasses and clovers 
they most fancy, and may doubtless deem them sweet 
and delicious ; but this does not constitute them sheep 
of the fold. The sheep hear the voice of their Shep- 



Digitized by 



INTRODUCTION. 



xi 



herd and they follow Him. He chooses the pastures ; 
He leads His sheep into them. The relations of sheep 
and Shepherd correspond to those of disciple and 
Teacher. And hence it is clear that no one ought to 
be received into the Catholic Church unless he come 
into the fold through the gate, of which Peter, the chief 
shepherd, is the keeper. 

Indeed, I may add, that people who, through negli- 
gence or inadvertence, have been admitted into the 
Church without having mastered the fundamental 
doctrine that they are to be disciples and learners of a 
living Divine Teacher, are apt, upon encountering 
temptation, scandal, contradiction, or disappointment, 
to leave her. They had indeed been within the fold, 
but they were not of it, because they had never really 
recognised the Shepherd. 

A word on two classes of difficulties raised against 
the Catholic Church by her professional opponents. 

First, intellectual difficulties: no doctrine is free 
from them, not even the existence of God and the im- 
mortality of the soul. Difficulties arise from the limi- 
tation of our faculties, from mists of ignorance, from 
prejudices, antipathies, and sinful conduct. The sun 
is shining, but we see it not while dense fogs or clouds 
and storms interpose between it and ourselves. We 
see it not when our vision has become gravely affected, 
or when we close our eyes. It is a common practice 
with the opponents of the Catholic Church to endeavour 
to hold souls back by arraigning before them a multi- 
tude of difficulties and objections against the doctrines 
of the Church. To this two things may be said. 




INTRODUCTION. 



First, it would be easy to string together a most for- 
midable array of difficulties quoted and examined by 
Catholic theologians in their great scientific works on 
theology. But it is obvious that it would be necessary 
to be a trained theologian, or to spend a lifetime in 
research, were it needful to give detailed answers to 
them - all. Then there are works, like those of Dr. 
Littledale and others, written in order to blind and 
mislead : made up of calumnies, misquotations, and a 
calculated admixture of truth and error. These are 
often intended to shock and alienate the moral sense 
quite as much as the intellectual. If they do not 
finally succeed in this, at least they may succeed in 
creating perplexity, anxiety, and delay. 

Now, instead of entering into a maze of objections, 
into a labyrinth of difficulties, a shorter and more 
satisfactory course should be taken. Find the Divine 
Teacher, find the Supreme Shepherd, find the Vicar of 
Christ. Concentrate all your mental and moral facul- 
ties upon finding the Head of God's Church upon earth. 
This is the key to the situation. The learned work to 
which these words serve as introduction is intended 
to aid this inquiry, by setting forth for this doctrine 
various of its reasonable motives of credibility. If only 
you find the Divine Teacher, you may leave all objec- 
tions to the doctrines he teaches to answer themselves. 
And if you find him not, then answers to the difficul- 
ties brought against his teaching will go for little. 

Secondly, moral difficulties have to be met — in- 
grained antipathies," traditional prejudices, fears and 
anxieties: fear to offend and grieve parents, guides, 




INTRODUCTION. 



xiii 



and loved ones ; fear of temporal consequences, loss of 
station, of influence, of fortune, possibly poverty and 
want; anxieties as to whether the call be of God, 
whether to trust Him without clear insight into the 
future; perplexities as to the difference between the 
motives of credibility and the divine certainty of faith. 
All these are very real and sharp trials ; but these, or 
others, are to be expected, for it is said, c Son, when 
thou comest to the service of God, stand in justice and 
in fear, and prepare thy soul for temptation. Humble 
thy heart, and endure ; incline thy ear, and receive the 
words of understanding, and make not haste in the time 
of clouds. Wait on God with patience ; join thyself to 
God and endure, that thy life may be increased in the 
latter end ' (Ecclus. ii.). 

Faith is a gift of God. No man can acquire faith 
by study alone, as by his own skill. c No man can come 
to Me, unless it be given him by My Father ' (John vi.). 
Or, to quote the Council of Trent : 

4 If any man saith that without the prevenient in- 
spiration of the Holy Ghost, and without His help, 
man can believe, hope, love, or be penitent as he 
ought, so as that the grace of justification may be be- 
stowed upon him, let him be anathema * (Sess. vi.). 

The motives of credibility which may be learnt 
by reading and «tudy do not produce the absolute and 
perfect certainty of faith. They lead a man to see that 
the objects of faith are worthy of belief ; they show 
him that he is under an obligation to give to them the 
assent of faith. But it is grace, it is God, who inspires 
the soul with the pious inclination to believe, the 4 pia 



Digitized by 



xiv 



INTRODUCTION. 



affectio ad credendum.' The certainty of faith rests, not 
indeed upon the motives of credibility, or upon facts or 
arguments that may or may not be evident in them- 
selves, but upon the veracity of God Who has revealed 
them. 

Or, as the Vatican Council defines it : 

4 Faith is a supernatural virtue, whereby, inspired 
and assisted by the grace of God, we believe that the 
things which He has revealed are true ; not because of 
the intrinsic truth of the things, viewed by the natural 
light of reason, but because of the authority of God 
Himself Who reveals them, and Who can neither de- 
ceive nor be deceived/ 

And again: 

i Though the assent of faith is by no means a blind 
action of the mind, still no man can assent to the 
Gospel teaching as necessary to obtain salvation, 
without the illumination and inspiration of the Holy 
Ghost, Who gives to all men sweetness in assenting to 
and in believing the truth. Wherefore, faith itself, 
even when it does not work by charity, is in itself a 
gift of God, and the act of faith is a work appertaining 
to salvation, by which man yields voluntary obedience 
to God Himself, by assenting to and co-operating with 
His grace, which he is able to resist.' 

And further on the same Council declares : 
6 That we may be able to satisfy the obligation of 
embracing the true faith and of constantly persevering 
in it, God has instituted the Church . . . which both 
invites to itself those who do not yet believe, and 
assures its children that the faith which they profess 



Digitized by 



INTRODUCTION. 



XV 



rests on the most firm foundation ; and its testimony is 
efficaciously supported by a power from on high. For 
our merciful Lord gives His grace to stir up and to aid 
those who are astray, that they may come to a know- 
ledge of the truth ; and to those whom He has brought 
out of the darkness into His own admirable light He 
gives His grace to strengthen them to persevere in that 
light, deserting none who desert not Him ' (Cap. de 
Fide). 

All this shows that the assent of faith is concerned 
with the will as well as with the intellect, and that a 
man who is seeking to come to a knowledge of that 
article of faith which declares that God has left a Divine 
Teacher to guide men safely in the affairs of salvation, 
must give himself to prayer and to humble repentance 
and contrition as much as to study and to reading. 
4 The prayer of him that humbleth himself shall pierce 
the clouds, and he will not depart till the Most High 
behold' (Ecclus. xxxv.). 

HERBERT CARDINAL VAUGHAN, 
Archbishop of Westminster. 



a 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Googl 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



The particular theory opposed in this book lies at the root 
of the controversy which we are forced to carry on with our 
Anglican friends on the subject of Church government at the 
present moment. It is the theory of the lawful independence 
of National Churches. Even the Magna Charta has been 
enlisted in the service of this theory by so able and respected 
a writer as Lord Selborne. The expression ' Let the Anglican 
Church be free ' is held by his Lordship to express the deter- 
mination of the Church of England in that century to be 
independent of Papal jurisdiction. 1 The present jurisdiction 
of the See of Canterbury is referred to the general question of 
the independence of National Churches by so eminent a writer 
as Dr. Stubbs. 2 Mr. Gore goes so far as to deduce from the 
teaching of St. Cyprian the fundamental independence of 
each bishop in the whole world. 8 And the present Archbishop 
of Canterbury writes that the ' individual independence of 
elected bishops ' was the Cyprianic doctrine, but that it is 
applicable only to ' States which have not that intimate union 
with the Church which the ideal of a Christian nation 
requires.' 4 In other words, the ideal condition, according to 
his Grace, is the independence, not of each bishop, but of 

1 A Defence of the Church of England, by Roundell, Earl of Selborne, fourth 
edition, 1888. He lays emphasis on the expression 4 Anglican,' as though it 
involved independence of Borne, p. 9. 

* Eastern Church Association Papers, No. 1. 

* R. C. Claims, p. 117, third edition. 

* Diet, of Chr. Biog. (Smith and Wace), art. 4 Cyprian.' 



a 2 




xviii 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



each national Church. And this was certainly the doctrine 
of some of the most eminent teachers in the Establishment in 
previous centuries, as for instance, Bishop Overall, the author 
of part of the Catechism in the Church of England Prayer- 
book. 1 

And this ideal of independence is asserted to be the teach- 
ing of history, the natural outcome of the principles which 
are to be discovered especially in the primitive Church. 
There, we are told, there was no dependence on Rome ; there 
was no shadow of centralisation to be seen ; there, if the Pope 
comes at times to the front, it is as the occupant of a See, 
great by reason of its relation to the empire, not because of 
any special relation to the Apostolic College. It was with this 
ideal of independence that, according to Dean Church, the 
Oxford movement was in special and profound sympathy. 3 

In the following pages, the doctrine set forth by John 
Peckham, Archbishop of Canterbury, in his famous letter to 
King Edward the First, as that of the Church of England, is 
maintained as the teaching of the primitive Church. 8 It is, 
of course, perfectly true that Magna Charta spoke of the 
Anglican Church being free ; but the freedom claimed and 
granted was not from the authority of the Pope, but from the 
lawlessness of the king — in a word, it involved, amongst other 
things, freedom to appeal, when necessary, to Rome. 4 ' The 
Anglican Church ' at that time signified a religious body in 
the closest communion with Rome, and under her obedience 
in spiritual matters. For in that same Charter, the Arch- 
bishop of Canterbury is called a Cardinal of the Holy Roman 

' See the thesis of his Convocation Book. 

* Oxford Movement, p. 211. He also quotes (p. 47) Hurrell Fronde's saying 
(Remains, edited by J. Keble), viz. * Let us give up a National Church, and have 
a real one/ i.e. if a national Church means lack of discipline. Dean Church 
thinks that the Oxford movement purged the national Church of its deeper 
faults. 

* See quotation from this letter, infra, p. 381. 

4 Hume says that by Magna Charta 4 all checks on appeals were removed.' 
He is speaking of appeals to Borne. 




author's preface. 



xix 



Chwrch, and the next words to those quoted by Lord Selborne 
proclaim the fact that the confirmation of ' the lord Pope 
Innocent ' had been ' obtained ' for this very matter. 1 It is 
maintained in this book that the close communion with Borne 
which the Church of England thus avowed, and which it 
cherished during all those centuries from St. Augustine to 
the sixteenth century, is a principle deeply embedded in the 
life of the primitive Church. 

But when we say that Papal supremacy is found deeply 
embedded in the life of the primitive Church, what do we 
exactly mean ? No one who appeals to the primitive Church 
professes to find in her actual life a literal transcript of his 
own present position. National Churches certainly did not 
exist in Europe ; it would be hard to say what could be in- 
cluded under the national Church of Borne. The appeal 
must be to something else than a primitive presentation of 
the form and outward appearance of any system in the nine- 
teenth century. What, then, do we ourselves mean when we 
say that the Papal regime was in existence in the earliest 
beginnings of Christianity? The question really is as to 
whether the alleged counterpart in the early Church differs 
from its successor in the present, in substance, in principle, 
in essential features. Is the difference, for instance, between 
the Papal regime of to-day and the position of the Papacy in 
the first four centuries of the Christian era more than between 
the oak and the acorn ? Does the difference between the two 
argue a dissimilarity of constituent elements, or is it merely the 
necessary difference between various stages of normal growth ? 

On meeting some one whom we have not seen since his 
childhood we are often constrained to exclaim, 'I should 
never have known it to be you ! ' Yet it is the same person 
whom Almighty God brought into the world as an infant, 
whose powers and appearance have thus developed. This 



Vim, concerning the election of bishops. 




XX 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



simile of the child and the grown man, as well as that of the 
oak and the acorn, was adopted in regard to the Church by 
St. Vincent of Lerins, the author of the formula (though not 
of the truth) of the f always, everywhere, and by all/ as a test 
of truth not yet defined. 

And yet an idea has taken hold of many minds to the 
effect that when Dr. Newman wrote his book nearly fifty years 
ago, now called ' The Development of Christian Doctrine/ he 
was striking out a new theory, 1 instead of merely illustrating, 
with that force which belonged to the greatest religious genius 
of this country, the theory on which the Church has always 
proceeded in teaching Christian history. His first title may 
be thought to countenance the idea ; but the second corrects 
it. And St. Vincent of Lerins is a sufficient witness that the 
theory which Cardinal Newman so expanded and illustrated 
was not new even in the fifth century. 

Dr. Dollinger only reflected the general teaching of the 
Church when he wrote, sixty years ago, with his usual felicity 
oiexpression, the following passage : 

4 Like all other essential parts of the constitution of the 
Church, the supremacy was known and acknowledged from 
the beginning as a divine institution, but it required time to 
unfold its faculties ; it assumed by degrees the determined 
form in which the Bishop of Rome exercised systematically 
the authority entrusted to him for the preservation of the 
internal and external unity of the Church.' 2 

And some years afterwards the same writer says of the 
Papacy : 

'Its birth begins with two mighty, pregnant, and far- 
reaching words of the Lord. He to whom these words are 
addressed realises them in his person and in his acts, and 
transplants the institute to which he has been appointed into 

1 Cf. Canon Bright's Lessons from the Lives of Three Great Fathers (Pre- 
face), where lie assumes this. 

• Oeschichte der christlichen Kirche (1835), toI. i. p. 865 




AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



xxi 



the centre of the infant Church, to the Roman capital itself. 
Here it grows up in silence, occtdto velut arbor avo ; and in the 
earliest times it manifests itself only in particular traits, till 
the outlines of the ecclesiastical power and action of the Bishop 
of Borne become ever clearer and more definite. Already even 
in the times of the Roman Empire the Popes are the guardians 
of the whole Church. 1 1 

I venture to call this view of the matter more in accord 
with history than that proposed by the respected writer 
to whom I have alluded, 3 which in effect prescinds all real 
development from the action of the Papacy, if it is to be 
acknowledged as of divine institution. 

It is the repudiation of the necessity of a real development 
which seems to me the greatest blot in a book which appeared 
last year under the auspices of the Bishop of Lincoln, who has 
made himself responsible for its general accuracy as well as 
its thesis. I have incorporated in this book an answer to the 
main points of that work. I have not, however, included an 
account of the Acacian troubles, because I have dealt with 
these elsewhere ; 3 but, in point of fact, the teaching of the 
Council of Chalcedon (with which this book closes) is such as 
to establish the fact that the law of Christian life is communion 
with Borne, and any seeming exceptions must be treated as 
such, and must not be quoted as establishing a principle of 
action in the future. To the history of that council I venture 
to draw the especial attention of the reader, because I am not 
aware of any English work that contains as full an account of 
its various acts. And it is only by seeing certain expressions 
in their context that their full value can be gauged, as esta- 
blishing, not what St. Leo claimed (though that has its value), 

1 The Church and the Churches, p. 81. Eng. trans. 
* Bright's Lessons y &c. 

9 In the Dublin Review for April 1894, where I have shown that com- 
munion between Borne and the East was not broken off at that time, but only 
suspended in some of its effects, and that consequently no argument can be 
derived from the existence of sanctity in some members of the Eastern Church. 




TX11 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



bat what the Church at large received without consciousness 
of novelty or usurpation. 

I have sometimes referred the reader to the original of 
Dr. Dollinger's writings, but more often to the English trans- 
lation, since the former is much less accessible than the latter. 

I have, in conclusion, to thank his Eminence the Cardinal 
Archbishop of Westminster for so kindly enriching this 
volume with an introduction, and the Censor Deputatus, 
Father Sydney Smith, S.J., for going beyond the necessities 
of his office in the way of many helpful suggestions. 



Note. — Since the above lines were written, a book has appeared 1 
by the Regius Professor of Ecclesiastical History in the University 
of Oxford, containing a chapter on ' Papalism and Antiquity,' which 
consists for the most part of a critique on a book of mine published 
in 1889.* Lest the following pages (especially the last two hundred) 
should seem a miracle of anticipation, I may as well say that the 
chapter in Canon Bright's work, to which I allude, is a reproduction 
or recension of an anonymous article by that writer in the ' Church 
Quarterly Review ' for October 1889, characterised by much bitter- 
ness against the ' Church of Rome,' calling it an atmosphere of 
untruthfulness. 

I do not propose to descend into the arena of vituperation and 
invective. But I am able to say that the following pages contain a 
direct answer to most of the arguments advanced in Canon Bright's 
'Papalism and Antiquity.' For after reading his article in the 
' Church Quarterly,' when it appeared in 1889, 1 came to the con- 
clusion that there was need of a fuller account of the Councils of 
Ephesus and Chalcedon than has yet been given in English, with 
special reference to the points urged in that article, and now re- 
peated in Canon Bright's recension of the same. It rarely falls to 
the lot of a writer to be able to produce an answer to such repre- 
sentations of history as Canon Bright proposes in his new book, 
within a few weeks of their appearance. But it is my good fortune 

1 Waymarks in Church History, by W. Bright, DJX, Canon of Christ 
Church, Oxford, Begins Professor of Ecclesiastical History. 1894. 

* Dependence ; or the Insecurity of the Anglican Position. By Bev. Luke ' 
Bivington, MA. (Eegan Paul, Trench <* Co. 1889.) 




AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



xxiii 



to have been able to do this through the accident of having selected 
the original draft for particular refutation. I would draw especial 
attention to the treatment of the twenty-eighth Canon of Chalcedon, 
on pages 487-449, as meeting one of Canon Bright 's chief points. 1 

But I feel bound to add a few words here on one passage in 
Canon Blight's chapter on Papalism, referring to this very subject. 2 
The Regius Professor says (p. 284), ' When Mr. Rivington tells us 
that " nothing more transpired concerning the canon, and it was 
omitted from the authorised collection of canons even in the East," 
he omits, and it is no small omission — it is a real suppressio veri — 
to say after Hefele that the Greeks did not adhere to the profession 
made by Anatolius, and that his successors continued to act as 
patriarchs under the terms of the new canon, with the full approval 
of their emperors, and in despite of the protests of Rome.' 

Will it be believed that Canon Bright has altered my words by 
a most important, my, crucial omission ? My words are (' Depen- 
dence/ p. 60), ' Nothing more transpired concerning the canon. No 
further appeal was made to it at that time, and it was omitted from 
the authorised collection of canons even in the East.' Now this 
statement is absolutely true. Hefele, to whom Canon Bright ap- 
peals, says the same : ' From that time Leo continued to exchange 
letters with Anatolius, and his successor Gennadius, but there was 
nothing more said between them on the subject of the twenty-eighth 
Canon' (' Hist, of the Councils,' § 207). But Canon Bright has omitted 
the all-important words, which I have placed in italics, and thus 
made my statement refer to the future instead of the present only. 
The strangest part of the matter is that in his anonymous article, of 
which he calls this chapter a ' recension' (of. Preface, p. vii), 
the words I have italicised above appear in their right place, and 
he there accuses me only of ' going near to suppressio veri ' (' Church 
Quarterly Review,' October, 1889, p. 188) ; whereas now, having in 
his 1 recension ' omitted the crucial words of my statement, he 
accuses me downright of that form of literary dishonesty. 

But, further, I had actually said on the same page, ' What Con- 
stantinople did was to continue its encroachments.' And on the 
next page but one (p. 62) I have given an instance of an attempt 
to revive the canon, and of the emperor's fruitless endeavour to 
induce Rome to recognise it. How, then, can Canon Bright say 

1 This canon is cherished as suggesting that Home's primacy was doe to 
her secular position alone. 

* His accusation of * carelessness ' on p. 227 will be seen by reference to 
p. 409 infra to be based on a misinterpretation of the passage as a whole. 




XXIV 



AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 



that I even suppressed this ? Nor is this writer correct in saying, 
1 It is all very well to talk of " the canon invalidated," i.e. from the 
Papal stand-point, but it is the canon which has practically pre- 
vailed.' The canon was invalidated from the high Anglican stand- 
point ; for as Le Quien (' Oriens Christianus,' p. 51) points out, a 
canon, to be a canon of the whole Church, must be accepted by the 
West. This was repudiated by the West. Even the Dlyrians did 
not sign. And when, centuries after, Constantinople was allowed 
to take precedence of other Eastern sees, it was not on account of 
this canon ; and in the previous centuries it was not the canon 
that prevailed, but unjustifiable encroachments. Does Canon 
Bright imagine that a canon passed under such disgraceful circum- 
stances as I have described below (cf . p. 440) — dropped by the arch- 
bishop and emperor in whose reign it was proposed — could override 
the Nicene settlement ? The Pope said, No. And when Acacius 
came on to the scene and acted on the canon, it was to place 
heretics, who opposed the doctrine of the Incarnation, as defined 
at Chalcedon, in the Eastern sees — heretics like Peter the Fuller at 
Alexandria. Canon Bright, in the same paragraph, quotes Libe- 
ratus against me ; but my account altogether agrees with that of 
Liberatus, who in the same chapter speaks of the ' usurpations ' of 
Anatolius, and in the passage quoted by Canon Bright is stigma- 
tising the Erastianism and encroachments that went on under the 
pretext of that canon, and in the following chapter describes the 
usurpations of the heretic Acacius (' detectus hereticus ').' In fact 
this whole passage in Canon Bright's book is, I regret to say, a 
tissue of misrepresentations, his accusation of suppressio veri being 
actually supported by omitting the very line which confines my 
statement to the present, whilst the truth supposed to be suppressed 
is concerned with the future. 



1 Breviarium, cap. xviii. 



L. R. 



The Pbesbytery, Spanish Place, 

London, W. 
March 30, 1894. 




CONTENTS 



PAGE 

Introduction by the Cabdinal Abchbishop or Wxbtminbtxb . . v 
Authob's Pbktacb xvii 

PERIOD I. a.d. 96-800. 



CHAPTER I. 

THE EPISTLE OP BT. CLEMENT ; OR THE TYPE SET. 

§ 1. The Church of Borne intervenes in the Schism at Corinth, p. 1. § 2. 
Reasons why St. Clement omitted his Name, 2. § 8. The authoritative 
Tone of the Letter, 7. § 4. Probably a Case of Appeal, 8 • pp. 1-10 

CHAPTER H. 

THE CLEMENTINE ROMANCE. 

§ 1. St Clement's Personality, p. 11. § 2. The Clementine Literature, 12. 
§ 8. Its Use i>y the Tubingen School, 18. § 4. Use by anti-Papal Writers 
to account for the Expression 4 See of Peter,' 18. § 6. Impossibility of this 
Supposition, 15. § 6. The List of Hegesippus anterior to the Romance at 
Rome, 17. § 7. Iremeus on the See of Peter, 22. § 8. The Clementines at 
Rome later than Tertullian, 25. § 9. Historical Results, 29 • pp. 11-81 

CHAPTER HI. 

ST. IRENJSUS, OR THE SOVEREIGNTY OF THE CHURCH OF ROME. 

§ 1. His Statement of the Rule of Faith, viz. Agreement with Rome, p. 82. 
§ 2. Protestant Endeavours to wrest his Meaning : e$. (a) Rome's Orthodoxy 
secured by the Confluence of Strangers, 84 ; (6) her 1 principalitas ' only 
Primitiveness, 85 ; or (c) due to her secular Position, 86 ; (d) undique, not 
«= everywhere, 86 ; (e) in qud, not = in communion with, 87 . pp. 82-38 

CHAPTER IV. 

ST. VICTOR, OR THE GUARDIAN OF THE COMMON UNITY. 

§ 1. The Modes of observing Easter, p. 89. § 2. St. Victor's Attempt to pro- 
duce Uniformity, 40. § 8. St. Irenaeus' Intervention, 42. Note on Mr. 
Poller's Interpretation, 44 pp. 89- 



k 



Digitized by 



Google 



xxvi 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER V. 

THE DOCTRINE OP BT. CYPRIAN ON UNITY. 



§ 1. St Cyprian on the Authority of St. Peter, p. 47. § 2. The Occasion of 
hie Treatise on Unity, viz. (a) Banger to the Episcopal Authority, 50; 
($) an unlawful Bishop at Borne, 65. § 8. Teaches Papal Supremacy inci- 
dentally, 57. § 4. St. Peter in the Treatise on Unity, 60. § 5. Corollaries, 
62 .... pp. 47-64 



CHAPTER VI. 

ST. CYPRIAN ON APPEALS TO ROMS. 

§ 1. lUsumS of the Saint's Teaching on Unity, p. 65. § 2. Fortunatus de- 
nounced for going to Borne, but not the Principle of Appeal, 67. § 8. Case 
of Marcian referred to Borne, 70. § 4. Spanish Bishops may be, but do 
not deserve to be, restored by the Pope, 72. Note on Mr. Puller's Interpre- 
tation • . . pp. 65-76 



CHAPTER VH. 

ST. CYPRIAN'S ERROR ON BAPTISM BY HERETICS. 

§ 1. Doctrine of Unity misapplied ; his threefold Error, p. 77. § 2. Convokes 
a Council on the Subject, 81. § 8. Second Council and Letter to Jubaianus, 
84. § 4. Befers the Matter to Borne, 86. § 5. Meanwhile holds third 
Council and decides in favour of Bebaptising, 88 . . pp. 77-98 



CHAPTER VIE. 

ROME'S DECISION AND CYPRIAN'S IRRITATION. 



§ 1. St Stephen's Decision, p. 94. § 2. St Cyprian's Legation to Borne, 97. 
§ 8. Letter to Pompeius and Firmilian, 97. § 4. Firmilian's passionate 
Beply, 100. § 6. Did St. Stephen actually excommunicate St. Cyprian ? 105. 
§ 6. Did St. Cyprian retract ? 111. § 7. Corollary as to Papal Infallibility, 
114 pp. 94-116 



CHAPTER IX. 



ROME, ALEXANDRIA} AND ANTIOCH, SEES OF PETER. 

§ 1. Only Peter left a Successor of his Apostolate, p. 117. § 2. Borne the 
Ballying-point from the first, 118. § 3. The three Sees of Peter, 120. 
§ 4. Belationship of Borne to Alexandria, 121. § 5. Belationsbip of Borne 
to Antiooh, 122. § 6. Why these three Sees chosen, 125. Appendix on 
the Popes' witness to their Offioe, 127 pp. 117-136 



Digitized by 



CONTENTS. 



xxvii 



PERIOD H. a.d. 800-884. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE DONATI8TS AND THE COUNCIL OP ARLES. 

§ 1. The Origin of the Donatist Schism, p. 139. § 2. The Donatists appeal to 
the Emperor, who refers them to Rome, 140. § 8. The Papal Sentence, 
141. § 4. Final in the Eyes of Augustine, as that of Peter's See, 142. 
§ 5. Case reheard to sift additional Facts, 144. § 6. British Bishops at 
Aries, 146. § 7. Donatist Erastianism, 147. § 8. Archbishop Laud's 
Mistranslation, 148 pp. 139-152 

CHAPTER XI. 

THE COUNCIL OF NIOEA. 

' Part I. — Reasons of its Meeting, 

J 1. The good Results of Heresies, p. 153. § 2. Need of a Council compatible 
with Papal Infallibility, 154. § 3. The Circumstances, 155. § 4. Papal 
Consent, 157. § 5. Why the Pope desired a Council, 159. 

Part n.— The Council itself. 

§ 1. The Pope presided, p. 161. § 2. Papal Jurisdiction not in Question, 
therefore not directly mentioned, 164. 

Part III.— The Sixth Canon. 

§ 1. The three Sees of Peter, p. 166. § 2. Alexandria's Jurisdiction rested on 
Home's Example, 167. § 3. Or on her Arrangement, 169. § 4. The ori- 
ginal Beginning of the Canon, 170 pp. 153-172 

CHAPTER XII. 

THE POPES THE GUARDIANS OF THE NICENB CANONS. 

Part I.— St. Julius. 

§ 1. The Post-Nicene Struggle, p. 173. § 2. Pope St. Julius and Alexandria, 
175. 

Part II.— The Sardican Canons. 

§ 1. Canon HL not concerned with Appeals to Rome, p. 179. § 2. Canon IV. 
supposes Appeals, 180. § 3. Canon VII. leaves it to Rome to decide the 
Mode of Appeal, 180. § 4. Received in the East, 181. § 5. Honouring 
the Memory of St. Peter, 182. Note on these Canons . . pp. 173-184 



Digitized by 



xxviii 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

THE REIGN OF LIBEBIUS. 

Part I.—Eis Personal Grandeur. 

§ 1. Defends St. Athanasius, and is exiled, p. 185. § 2. His supposed Fall, 186. 
§ 3. His Stand after the Ariminian Catastrophe, 188. 

Part II.— The Meletian Scandal at Antioch. 

§ 1. The Consequence of Meletius' Eleetion, p. 190. § 2. The Council of 
Alexandria on the same, 194. § 3. The precipitate Action of Bishop Luoifer 
198. § 4. Eusebius of Vercellae settles nothing, 199 . . pp. 185-202 

CHAPTER XIV. 

ST. DAMASUB. 

§ 1. His Sanctity, p. 203. § 2. His Election, 207. § 3. His central Position, 
208. § 4. His Condemnation of Heresies, 211. § 5. St. Basil looks to the 
West, 213. § 6. St. Damasus differs as to the best Bemedy, 215. § 7. Sides 
with Paulinas at Antioch, 218. § 8. St. Basil's Irritation, 219. § 9. His 
petulant Expression not Disbelief, 222. § 10. Believed in Rome's Jurisdic- 
tion in the East, 224. § 11. St. Damasus neither approved nor repudiated 
St. Meletius, 226. § 12. St. Jerome's Witness, 227. § 13. St. Meletius 
and Paulinus come to Terms, 229 pp. 203-232 

CHAPTER XV. 

THE HOMAGE OF KINGS \ OB GRATIAN'S RESCRIPT. 

§ 1. The ideal Relation between Church and State, p. 233. § 2. Realised for 
awhile under Gratian, 234. § 3. Relationship between Gratian and St. 
Ambrose, 235. § 4. Gratian gives civil Facilities for the exercise of Rome's 
Supremacy, 235. § 5. Mr. Puller's Theory as to Gratian's Rescript refuted : 
(L) by the Absence of any Protest, 238 ; (ii.) and by the Words of the 
Rescript compared with the Letter of the Roman Synod, 239 pp. 233-242 

CHAPTER XVI. 

THE COUNCIL OF CONSTANTINOPLE (A.D. 38l). 
Part I— Theodosius and the Imperial City. 
§ 1. Theodosius made Emperor, p. 243. § 2. Issues a Law defining the Term 
* Catholic,' 244. § 8. Gregory and Maximus in Constantinople, 245* 
§ 4. Theodosius resolves upon a General Eastern Council, 246. 

Part II.— The Council. 

§ 1. St. Gregory's Election confirmed, p. 248. § 2. St. Meletius dies, 249. 
§ 8. Flavian elected to Antioch, 250. § 4. St. Gregory resigns, 253. 
§ 5. Nectarius appointed in his Place, 255. § 6. How the Council came to 
be oecumenical, 256. 



Digitized by 



CONTENTS. 



mnir 



Part m.—New Borne ; or the Third Canon, p. 258. 

Part IV.— The Western Disapproval of Flavian's Election, p. 268. 

Note on Mr. Poller's Proof that St. Meletius was oat of Communion with Borne, 
p. 267. Conclusion of Second Period. Councils of a.d. 882 at Borne and 
Constantinople, 269 248-279 



PERIOD in. a.d. 400-452. 
CHAPTER XVII. 

THE CHURCH OF NORTH AFRICA IN THE DAYS OF BT. AUGUSTINE. 

Part I.— The Letters of St. Innocent. 

§ 1. Ccelestius, condemned in Africa, appeals to Borne, p. 284. § 2. The Synods 
of Carthage and Mflevis write from Africa to Borne, 286. § 8. St. Inno- 
cent's Rescripts— their Doctrine on St. Peter's See, 288. § 4. Their Recep- 
tion by the African Fathers — its Witness to African Belief, 289. 



Part II.— St. Zosimus* Support of the Faith 
§ 1. Did not sanction Pelagian Statements, p. 291. § 2. Cautiousness of the 
Pope, 298. § 8. St. Augustine and Dr. Pusey, 298. § 4. St. Zosimus' En- 
cyclical ' confirming the Brethren,' 296. 

Part IIL—Apiarius and Papal Jurisdiction. 
§ 1. A Canon quoted of which the Africans ignorant, p. 297. § 2. Legates a 
latere deprecated, 298. § 8. The whole Matter a Question of Procedure, not 
of Principle, 800. § 4. The Genuineness of the chief Letter open to Ques- 
tion, 808 pp. 288-804 



CHAPTER XVIIL 



THE COUNCIL OF BPHE8US — ITS PRELIMINARIES. 

§ 1. The Matter in Dispute, p. 805. § 2. St. Cyril's Action, 306. § 8. The 
Papal Intervention, 306. § 4. St. Cyril asks the Pope for Judgment, 307. 
§ 5. St. Celestine appoints Cyril his Plenipotentiary, 809. § 6. Conclusions 
as to the Pope's Position, 811. § 7. Anglican Writers on the above, 813. 
§ 8. Cyril's Action as Plenipotentiary, 315. § 9. Nestorius, having the 
Emperor's ear, makes for a Council, 316. § lO.Meets at Ephesus, without 
the Bishop of Antioch, 319. § 11. Celestine (Pope) the real, Cyril the 
acting President, 821 . pp. 805-828 



Digitized by 



XXX 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER XIX. 



THE ACTS OP THE COUNCIL. 



§ 1. Nestorius refuses to appear, p. 829. § 2. The Relation of the Bishops' 
Judgment to that of the Pope, 330. § 3. The Aotion of the Council, 
332. § 4. The Council's Sentence, 333. § 5. Anglican Writers on the 
Council's Sentence, 336. § 6. The immediate Result of the Sentence, 336. 
§ 7. The Arrival of Legates from Rome, 338. § 8. The schismatic Synod, 
341 pp. 329-343 



THE SEE OP PETER ' CONFIRMING THE BRETHREN.' 

§ 1. The Papal Legates' Judgment, p. 344. § 2. The Council's Witness to the 
Supremacy of the Pope, 345. § 3. John of Antioch condemned by the 
Synod, but referred to the Pope, 350. § 4. The Pope's fatherly Care, 354. 
§ 5. The Case of the Cyprians, and Canon Bright on the Expression * worldly 
Pride,' 356. Conclusions, 361 pp. 344-361 



§ 1. Introductory Remarks on the Council of Chalcedon, p. 862. § 2. The 
Origin of the Council — Eutyches* Perversion of St. Cyril's Writings, 364. 
§ 3. Eutyches condemned at Constantinople, 865. § 4. Eutyches appeals 
to Rome, 865. § 5. St. Leo blames Archbishop of Constantinople for not 
sending Report, 367. § 6. Eutyches makes for a Council, 368. § 7. Arch- 
bishop of Constantinople prefers a Papal Brief to a Council, 369. § 8. The 
Position of the Pope in the Thoughts of Christendom, 371. § 9. The Tome 
of St. Leo, 872. § 10. Revises the Acts of the Synod of Constantinople, 
873. § 11. Leo consents to a Council to convict Eutyches, 874. § 12. De- 
scribes his Tome as an ex Cathedrd Pronouncement, 875. § 13. Describes 
the Office of the Council, 376 pp. 362-377 



§ 1. Its uncanonical Composition, p. 378. § 2. Eutyches is acquitted, Leo's 
Tome suppressed, Flavian condemned, 379. § 3. The Inadequacy of a 
Primacy of Honour to meet the Case, 380. § 4. The Supremacy exercised 
by Leo, 382. § 5. Flavian's Appeal to Rome, 383. § 6. Leo insists on 
another Council, 384. § 7. Demands the Enforcement of the Niceno-Sardi- 
can Canon, 385. § 8. The Emperor and Empresses write to Theodosius, 
388. § 9. Leo describes his Duty to the whole Church, 390. § 10. The 
new Emperor decides on a Council, 391. § 11. Anatolius, Archbishop of 
Constantinople — his Antecedents, 392. § 12. Leo requires his Profession 
of Faith in accordance with his Tome, 393. § 13. Anatolius sends it and 
receives Directions, 896. § 14. St. Leo's Tome signed by Anatolius and 



CHAPTER XX. 



CHAPTER XXL 



THE FOURTH GENERAL COUNCIL — PRELIMINARIES. 



CHAPTER XXH. 



THE LATROCINIUM, OR ROBBER COUNCIL. 



other Bishops, 397 



pp. 378-308 




CONTENTS. 



xxxi 



CHAPTER XXHL 

THE DEPOSITION OP OIOSCOBUS. 

§ 1. The Work before the Council, p. 399. § 2. Dioscorus condemned, 400 
§ 3. The Sentence pronounced in the Name of the Pope, 403. § 4. On the 
Matter of Faith nothing new needed after Leo's Tome, 408. § 5. The so- 
called Review of Leo's Tome, 409 pp. 399-418 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE DEFINITION OP FAITH. 

The Bishops in Danger of adopting an insufficient Formula, p. 419 ; are kept 
right by the Commissioners and Papal Legates, 420. They have to answer 
the Question of Obedience to Leo's Decision, 421 ; Principles that emerge, 
424 pp. 419-425 

CHAPTER XXV. 

THBODORET AND MAXIMUS. 

1. Theodoret appealed to the See of Peter, p. 427 ; the Sentence against him 
annulled, 429 ; his Presence objected to at Chaloedon, 430 ; allowed the 
Position of Bishop, 431 ; acted as such in the Council, 431 ; compelled to 
anathematise Nestorius, 432; not a Review of Leo's Judgment, 432. 
II. Majrimus of Antioch irregularly ordained, 433 ; condoned by Leo, to. ; 
his Position accepted on that ground, 434 . . -pp. 426-436 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

THE BYZANTINE PLOT ; OR THE TWENTY-EIGHTH CANON. 

The Ambition of Constantinople, p. 437 ; Rebuff at Chalcedon, 440 ; Opening 
for a Move, 441 ; some Bishops passed a Canon, 442 ; the Papal Legates 
protest, 443 ; Imperial Commissioners side with the Bishops, 445 ; Value 
of the Canon, 447 pp. 487-449 

CHAPTER XXVn. 

THE EASTERNS* RECOGNITION OF PAPAL SUPREMACY. 

The Bishops write to Leo, p. 451 ; express full Doctrine of Papal Supremacy, 
452-454 ; Anatolius does the same, 455 ; Leo and the West repudiate the 
Canon, 458 pp. 450-460 

CONCLUSION [pp. 459-460] 



b 



Digitized by 



xxxii 



CONTENTS. 



APPENDICES 

PAGI 

I. Rev. F. W. Pulleb's Interpbetation op St. Cyprian . . 461 

II. Are the Sardican Canons Nicene? 467 

III. Rev. F. W. Puller on St. Ambrose 475 

IV. The Apostolic See ; Meaning op the Phrase .... 479 

Index 483 



EBB AT A 

P. 188, lines 10, 9, 8 from bottom : for but its numbers after an interval . . . 
belied its beginning read but its numbers fell off as it continued its sessions 
after an interval, at the emperor's command, and its end belied its beginning. 

P. 189, line 2, for mission read minion. 



Digitized by 



PEEIOD I. 

A.D. 96-800. 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTEB I. 



THE EPISTLE OF ST. CLEMENT 



OB 



THE TYPE SET. 



I. In the very first document belonging to Christian his- 
tory, outside the pages of Holy Scripture, the Church of Rome 
steps to the front in a manner that is suggestive of supreme 
authority, and that tallies with her whole future attitude 
towards the rest of the Church. The occupant of the See of 
Borne comes before us, speaking in the name of his Church, 
within the lifetime of the Apostle St. John, and settles a dis- 
turbance in a region naturally more nearly related to that 
Apostle than to the Church of Rome. And he comes before 
us both as in possession of a tradition of divine truth, and as 
its authoritative exponent to a distant Church. He lays down 
the law of worship and government for the whole Church as 
of Divine institution. 

The circumstances were as follows : — The Church in Corinth 
had for some time been torn by dissensions, and had caused 
the utmost scandal on all sides (§ 47). 1 A few fiery spirits, 
with a considerable following, had succeeded in extruding 
probably their bishop and some of his presbyters, if not, 
indeed, one or more bishops in the neighbourhood, from their 
sacred office {iinaKoirrj, § 44). 2 The Church of Rome came 
to the rescue. The persecutions under Nero and Domitian had 
alone prevented her from intervening earlier (§ 1). But as 
soon as possible St. Clement wrote a letter entitled, f The 

1 The references to St. Clement's letter are from Dr. Lightfoot's edition— 
the second, posthumously published in 1890. 
9 St Clement calls it a schism (§ 46). 



B 




ROME INTERVENES AT CORINTH. 



a.d. 96 



Church in Rome to the Church in Corinth/ which Dr. Light- 
foot characterises as 'almost imperious' 1 in tone, and which 
St. Irenaeus spoke of as ' most powerful,' or * most adequate.' 2 
In this letter St. Clement speaks of the tradition which the 
Church of Rome had received from the Apostles themselves 
(§ 44), as to a succession of rulers in the Church, to prevent 
strife ' about the name [i.e. dignity] of the office of bishop 
(l7rt(7/co7r».' Speaking of this government of the Church, he 
finds its type in the Old Covenant, in the High Priest, Priests, 
and Levites. He says that the Apostles, in order to obviate 
strife, ordained as successors in the ministry (keirovpyias) 
bishops and deacons. He magisterially reproves the ring- 
leaders of the disturbances in Corinth for attempting to 
extrude such successors of the Apostles, 3 and says that ' it will 
be a sin in us ' to depose them from their ' sacred office 
(ima/coirf}?).' Further on, in a passage only discovered of 
late, he claims their 'obedience unto the things written by 
us through the Holy Spirit' (§ 63), as he had said a 
little previously : ' If any disobey the things spoken by 
Him through us, let them know that they will involve them- 
selves in transgression and no small peril' (§ 59). The 
letter concludes with saying that they hope soon to receive 
back again the legates whom they have sent, with a report 
from Corinth that the peace, which they desire, has been 
restored. 

Such was the first recorded act of the Church of Rome. 
And it is spoken of in terms of enthusiasm by St. IrenaBus, 
from whom we gather that the Corinthians amended their 
ways, and the desired result was achieved. It is also alluded 
to with commendation by St. Ignatius on his way to his 
martyrdom. 

II. Dr. Lightfoot lays great stress on the fact that the 
name of St. Clement does not appear in this letter, but only 

1 St. Clement of Borne, vol. i. p. 69. 1890. 
* UavoordTtip, Adv. Har. iii. 8, 8. 

1 robs . . . K*TaaraB4vrtB far* iicclyvy [i.e. the Apostles] ^ fi*ra£b ty* krtpvv 
. . . oh liKalus yoti((on*r itiro&dWctrOcu, k.t.A. (§ 44). Notice the present tense 
in the latter word. The Church of Borne treats the action of the Corinthians 
as incomplete* 




—300 



THE BISHOPS NAME OMITTED. 



s 



that of the Church of Rome. 1 He admits, however, that the 
letter was written by St. Clement, and calls it an ' incident in 
his administration' of the Church. 8 But he thinks that 
St. Clement ' studiously suppressed ' 3 his name, as not being 
in such a position of authority as is involved in the monarch- 
ical idea of the episcopate. He thinks that, in consequence, 
* his personality is absorbed ' 4 in the Church of Rome, and 
that in this we may discern a vital difference between the 
first century and the fifth. He says that 1 the language of 
this letter is inconsistent with the possession of Papal autho- 
rity in the person of the writer ; ' that ' it does not proceed 
from the Bishop of Rome, but from the Church of Rome.' 
It is spoken of, he says, in the second century as ' from the 
community, not from the individual.* 

It will be well at once to warn our readers of a general 
misconception involved in the use of the word ' monarchical ' 
as applied by certain writers (such as Dr. Lightfoot and Dr. 
Salmon and others) to the episcopate, and above all, to the 
Bishop of Rome. 

When we speak of the Bishop of Rome as the infallible 
guardian of the faith, we do not mean that he is placed in 
a position m which he can act in isolation from the rest of 
the episcopal body. The very doctrine of Papal Infallibility 
implies that he never can act apart from the general teach- 
ing of the Church. We can always be sure that his utter- 
ances, when attended with those conditions which are 
implied in the exercise of his infallibility, are the exposition 
of the Church's mind as a whole. If we were to suppose 
the case of the Pope on the one side, and the whole of 
the episcopate arrayed against him on the other, we should 
be obliged to hold that the Pope would be in the right and 
the rest of the episcopate in the wrong. But such a case 
never has occurred, and never can. It is involved in our 
Lord's promise of His presence with the Church in her 
teaching 'all days unto the consummation of the world,' * 
that the body will never be separated from the head. 
The Holy Father speaks in the name of his children ; and 

1 Loc. tit. p. 69. * P. 84. » P. 352. 



4 P. 69. 



* St. Matt, xxviii. 20. 



b 2 




4 THE CHURCH OF ROME AND THE BISHOP a.d. 9H 

his children will never, as a whole, protest against his 
teaching. 

But not only so. The Bishop of Borne, throughout the 
ages, has adopted the principle on which St. Cyprian, who 
especially expounded the monarchical idea of the episcopate, 
says that he ever proposed to govern his diocese — viz. with 
consultation. So nothing is more characteristic of the 
government of the Church by those great Popes, like St. 
Damasus and St. Leo, in the fourth and fifth centuries, than 
their use of episcopal assessors. As St. Ignatius speaks of 
the bishop of the diocese having his corona — his circlet — of 
presbyters, so the Bishops of Borne ever had their circlet of 
bishops, and made use of their advice in »all great matters 
concerning the general welfare of the Church. When, then, 
the Popes used the plural ' we,' they were not only using the 
majestic plural, but they had gathered into their utterances 
with a special closeness a portion of that great whole in 
whose name they were justified in speaking. They had held 
their synod. They were not acting in lone majesty, but in 
concert with others whom they had gathered into a special 
closeness of contact with themselves. 

Again, the supremacy which belongs strictly to the Bishop 
of Borne, as the successor of St. Peter, is often attributed, not 
to the Bishop of Borne, but to the Church of Borne. In the 
later history of the Church we constantly meet with the 
supremacy of the bishop spoken of as though it belonged to 
the Church of Borne. To this day we constantly speak of 
* Borne ' doing this or saying that, while of course we believe 
that the informing power of the whole is the bishop himself, 
as successor of Peter and Vicar of Christ. Martin V., in the 
Council of Constance, condemned the proposition of Wicliffe, 
that 1 it is not of necessity to believe that the Boman Church 
is supreme amongst the other Churches ; ' and in the Creed pf 
Pope Pius IV. a similar expression is used by converts *>n 
their reception into the Church, viz. : 1 1 acknowledge the 
holy Catholic and Apostolic Boman Church to be the mother 
and mistress of all Churches/ just as in the profession of 
faith prescribed by Clement IV. and Gregory X., and made 
by the Greeks after the second Council of Lyons, the words 




—300 



OF ROME ARE ONE. 



5 



are: 'The holy Roman Church has the supreme and full 
primacy and sovereignty over the whole Catholic Church.' 
And, lastly, the Vatican decree runs thus (Constit. * Pastor 
iEternus,' cap. 8) : 4 We teach and declare that the Eoman 
Church, by the ordinance of Christ (disponente Domino), has 
the sovereignty of ordinary power over all other [Churches].' 

Consequently, if primitive Christian history presents us 
with the spectacle of the Church of Rome calling herself by 
this name, and stepping to the front to act with authority in 
guarding the faith of the Church as to the Apostolic succession 
of her rulers, and restoring unity to a divided Christian com- 
munity at a distance, this does not constitute anything like 
a vital difference between this early expression of authority 
and the most recent instance of Papal rule. It is at most a 
difference of terminology. It would not follow that, because 
an act of authority was done in the name of the Church of 
Rome, it was not done by the authority of the Bishop of 
Rome. 1 Unless, then, Dr. Lightfoot had been able to show 
that there was no other possible reason for St. Clement sup- 
pressing his name in the letter to Corinth, the fact that he 
did suppress it would not prove that he did not occupy the 
position in the minds of the early Christians that he occupies 
now in the Roman Catholic Church. And yet the argument 
from silence is the main point urged by Dr. Lightfoot in this 
matter. 1 The language of this letter,' to which he appeals as 
showing a difference between earlier and later Popes, means 
its silence as to the name of its author. 

But there is more than one possible solution of this silence* 
If the tradition which St. Epiphanius 2 gives is based on facts, 
to the effect that after the death of the Apostles Peter and Paul 
St. Clement refused to occupy the position of bishop in the 
Roman community out of modesty, the same deep humility 
might well operate in this, perhaps, first great act of discipline 
exercised by him towards a distant Church. On the Papal 
teaching concerning Church government it would be enough 
for St. Clement to mention the Church of Rome ; she held 
* the principality/ as St. Irenseus says, which, says St. Augus- 

1 Cf. Life of St. Thomas of Canterbury by Rev. J. Morris, S. J., p. 135. 
* Bar. xxvii. 6. 




6 



THE BISHOP IS IN THE CHURCH 



a.d. 90 



tine, 'was always in force.' St. Clement was successor of 
St. Peter because he was Bishop of Borne. He owed his 
relationship to the Divine Head of the Church, viz. that of 
His Vicar, to his position in the Church of Borne ; and it 
would not be unnatural, in writing a letter of some severity 
to the Church at Corinth, that he should simply speak of the 
Church of Borne, and not mention his own unworthy name. 
This will only seem far-fetched and fanciful to those who do 
not reflect that our Lord's description of the vital difference 
between the head of His kingdom and those of the kingdoms 
of this world was that ' the principal one ' in His kingdom 
would not * lord it ' over others, after the example of this 
world's rulers, but would be amongst the rest as He Himself 
was— their Buler, their Lord and Infallible Teacher, and yet 
lowly and meek in heart. 1 

But there is yet another possible, and indeed probable, 
solution of this suppression of his name, on which Dr. Ligbt- 
foot has rested his argument as to the difference between 
St. Clement and the Papacy in subsequent times. The Church 
had only just emerged from the most fiery persecutions, and 
might at any moment be exposed to another. All societies, 
organised without leave from the civil authorities, were illegal, 
and consequently the last thing that the head of the Christian 
community would do under such circumstances would be to 
flaunt their condition as an organised body before the world. 
A letter, of such authoritative tone as St. Clement's, with his 
own name at its head, might easily fall into the hands of 
strangers; and if St. Peter himself thought it advisable to 
call Borne ' Babylon,' 2 when writing of the Church of Borne, 
it might very well seem the part of prudence in the bishop to 
suppress his name when writing from Borne. 

And yet neither of these suppositions is necessary to 
account for the fact of St. Clement's silence as to his 
name. Writing as the head of the Christian community, 
he could write officially in its name. A successor of his did 

1 St. Luke xxii. 25-27. And so from the time of St. Damasus the Popes 
have called themselves the • servant of servants.' 

* 1 St. Peter v. 13. Dr. Lightfoot so understands the word * Babylon ' in 
his St. Clement of Rome, vol. ii. p. 491, 2. 




—300 AND THE CHURCH IN THE BISHOP. 7 



the same, St. Soter. And Eusebius expressly says that 
Clement wrote in the name of his Church, 1 and St. Jerome, 
that he wrote in the person of the Church. 2 

And this is the explanation of a passage in Eusebius in 
which he speaks of this letter of St. Clement. St. Dionysius 
of Corinth, writing to the Church of Rome, describes the letter 
as ' your Epistle written to us by Clement;' whereas Eusebius 
says that Dionysius made 4 some remarks relating to the 
Epistle of Clement to the Corinthians,' on which Dr. Lightfoot 
convicts Eusebius of making an assumption not warranted by 
the words of Dionysius. 3 But the Greek historian, like all 
the world after him, considered it was all one, to call it, as 
Dionysius did, the letter of the Romans ' by Clement/ or the 
letter of Clement : just as St. Clement of Alexandria speaks 
of it in both ways, as the Epistle of the Romans, 4 and the 
Epistle of Clement. 6 All is explained by the principle which 
St. Cyprian laid down when he said, ' You ought to know 
that the bishop is in the Church, and the Church in the 
bishop. 9 

It would not have been necessary to enter at such length 
into Dr. Lightfoot's interpretation of this omission of the 
name in St. Clement's letter, were it not that Dr. Lightfoot's 
name gives weight to everything that he says, and that many 
who heartily repudiate his views as to the Christian ministry 6 
yet follow him in this particular point. 

m. The letter, then, of St. Clement was written in the name 
of the Church of Rome, and was, as Dr. Lightfoot says, 4 the 
only recorded incident in his administration of the Church.' 
It was, according to the same writer, ' undoubtedly the first 
step towards Papal domination.' It would seem impossible to 
mistake its tone of authority, 'almost imperious,' says the 
same writer. 7 Dr. Salmon, in his book on ' Infallibility,' 8 

1 H.E.iiL 37. * De Viris Illustr. 15. 

» Loc tit. p. 358. * Strom, v. 12, 81. » lb. iv. 17, 19. 

* Mr. Gore has an excellent reply to Dr. Lightfoot's erroneous conception 
of the episcopate in the early Christian Church in his Church and the Ministry, 
1889, note A, p. 358 seq. 

1 Mr. Gore (ib. p. 325) speaks of * the teaching authority which breathes 
in his [Clement's] Epistle.' 

• Salmon's (G.) Infallibility of the Church, second edit. p. 379. 




8 



ITS TONE OF AUTHORITY. 



a.d. 96 



maintains that the tone 4 is only that of the loving remon- 
strance which any Christian is justified in offering to an erring 
brother.' But in his article on St. Clement in the 1 Dictionary 
of Christian Biography ' (Smith and Wace), he says, ' Very 
noticeable in the new part of the letter is the tone of authority 
used by the Roman Church in making an unsolicited inter- 
ference with the affairs of another Church.' 1 * Already in 
St. Clement's letter an assumption, so natural as to be almost 
unconscious, of the right to advise and interpose underlies his 
pacificatory argument.' 2 

It is certainly singular that only a few years after the 
dogma of Papal Infallibility, always the general belief of 
Christians, had, in view of emerging denials, been made 
obligatory, a manuscript, in a Greek monastery, containing 
strong assertions of the divine authority with which the 
Church of Borne conceived herself to be speaking, should be 
suddenly unearthed. Dr. Lightfoot had substituted a long 
fragment from another writer, as possibly the substance of 
the long-lost portion of this invaluable letter, and most 
scholars admired his ingenuity. But a comparison with this 
suggested complement of the letter, and the actual fragment 
now recovered, will show how the imagination of a brilliant 
scholar differs from the actual thoughts of the great Bishop 
of Borne himself. 3 

IV. There is one passage which suggests an answer to the 
question, whether this letter from Borne was in answer to an 
appeal or was an unsolicited intervention. The writer says 
(§ 44) that ' we do not think that such as these ' (i.e. men 
left there by Apostles and of good repute) * are being justly 
cast out from the sacred ministry ; for it will be no small sin 
in us, if we should extrude [or depose] from the episcopate 
those who have offered the gifts blamelessly and holily.' 

1 Dr. Salmon, in the preface to his book on the Infallibility of the Church, 
says that mach of it was written years ago. It certainly contrasts strangely in 
its tone of abruptness and heat with his admirable Introduction to the Study 
of the New Testament, in which he takes the same view of St. Clement's letter 
as in Smith and Wace's Dictionary. Possibly the new ending had not been 
discovered when he wrote that portion of his work on Infallibility. 

9 Cruttwell's (C. T. ) Lit. Hist of Early Christianity, 1898, vol. ii. p. 404. 

» Lightfoot's Clement of Borne, 1890, vol. i. p. 178. 




—300 



A CASE OF APPEAL. 



9 



It certainly seems as though the case of these bishops (I 
use the exact equivalent, without meaning thereby to 
settle the question what exactly their office was) had been 
laid before the Church of Borne. The Corinthians had 
removed them from the exercise of their office, as is stated 
in the next sentence ; but in this sentence the writer of the 
Epistle treats their deposition as not concluded ; it is the pre- 
sent tense, as though their act awaited its completion at the 
hands of Borne. Whether this were so or not, the matter must 
have been brought before them in some way, for Borne passes 
most definite judgment as to whether these rulers deserved 
such treatment, instead of asking for further particulars. 
The passage in which St. Clement speaks of the 'report* 
having reached Borne, 1 which seems at first sight to suggest 
that the Bomans had not been directly consulted on the 
matter, refers only to the statement that the disturbance, of 
which the main facts seem to have been brought very cir- 
cumstantially before the Church of Borne, was due to only 
'one or two ringleaders.' The expression in the beginning 
of the letter, 'the matters in dispute among you, 9 does not 
compel us to suppose that the matters of dispute among 
them had not been also referred to Borne. For if there had 
been no appeal, why should St. Clement excuse himself for 
not having attended to the matter sooner ? On the whole, 
then, it seems most likely, though not certain, that the letter 
was written in answer to an appeal from Corinth. 

Such, then, was ' the first step towards Papal domination ' 
(Lightfoot), or, as we should prefer to call it, the first recorded 
exercise of authority towards a distant Church. There was 
no protest ; on the contrary, St. Iren&us and St. Ignatius 
praised it, and Corinth treasured the letter and read it at 
Divine service on the Lord's Day for years to come. 

Such is the dawn of uninspired Christian history. In 
that first century of the Christian era unity was restored at 
Corinth by the action of Borne writing a most powerful letter 
and sending legates 2 to the scene of disturbance; and, 
according to St. Ignatius, Borne was the teacher of others, 
with special allusion, it is thought, to this letter : ' Ye taught 

1 § 47, ad finem. ' Clem. Ep. ad Cor. § 45. 



Digitized by 



10 



A CASE OF APPEAL. 



a.d. 96—800 



others ' (Ign. * Ep. ad Rom.' § 8) are words which, as Dr. 
Lightfoot remarks, 1 'the newly discovered ending of St. 
Clement's letter enables us to appreciate more fully ' — a letter 
in which the writer claims to speak with the authority of 
God. 

The least that can be said of this first disclosure of Rome's 
position in the Church is that it fits in with her present 
position in Roman Catholic Christendom. 

1 Loc. tit. p. 71. 



Digitized by 



CHAPTER H. 



THE CLEMENTINE ROMANCE. 



I. 'It is very remarkable/ says a Protestant historian, 
' that a person of such vast influence in truth and fiction, 
whose words were law, who preached the duty of obedience and 
submission to an independent and distracted Church, whose 
vision reached even to unknown lands beyond the Western Sea, 
should inaugurate, at the threshold of the second century, 
that long line of pontiffs who have, outlasted every dynasty 
in Europe, and now claim an infallible authority over the 
consciences of 200,000,000 of Christians.' 1 

Dr. Schaff here speaks of St. Clement, who, as Dr. Salmon 
says, 'speaks in a tone of authority to a sister Church of 
Apostolic foundation, and thus reveals the easy and innocent 
beginning of the Papacy,' 2 in a letter which, as Dr. Lightfoot 
observes, forms ' undoubtedly ' ' the first step towards Papal 
domination.' 3 

The reasonable explanation is that he spoke as successor 
of St. Peter, the Prince of the Apostles. The first recorded 
utterance of a Christian bishop in uninspired literature 
speaks in the name of his Church with the voice of infallibility, 
and that Church is the Church of Rome. His letter was 
bound up with Holy Scripture, and is to be seen this day in 
the British Museum amongst the contents of the great Alex- 
andrian Codex of the Bible. According to Origen, Eusebius, 

1 Schaff' s Hist, of the Church. Ante-Nicene Christianity, vol. ii. p. 639 
(Edinburgh). * He was regarded/ says Lightfoot, 'as the interpreter of the 
Apostolic teaching and the codiner of the Apostolic ordinances ' (St. Clem. vol. 
L p. 103). 

* Salmon's (G.) Introduction to the Study of N. Test, p. 646. 

• SL Clement of Rome, second edition, p. 70. In the first edition it is 
• Papal aggression.' 




12 



ITS USE BY BAUR, 



a.d. 96 



and St. Jerome, he was that Clement whose name St. Paul 
mentions as ( in the book of life.' According to some modern 
authorities he was a Jewish freedman, or the son of a freedman 
belonging to the household of Flavius Clemens (Lightfoot). 
There can be little doubt that his letter, read as it was in 
public worship in numerous Churches, as, for instance, in 
Corinth itself, for many years, made the name of Clement 
sufficiently well known for a large amount of spurious litera- 
ture to gather round it in the second and third centuries— a 
literature which has played an extraordinarily prominent part 
in modern controversy. It furnishes, according to Dr. 
Lightfoot, Dr. Salmon, the Bishop of Lincoln, and Mr. Puller, 
the key to the assertions made by the Christian writers of the 
third century to the effect that the See of Borne is the See of 
Peter. The same literature had already been seized upon 
with avidity by the Rationalist school of Tubingen, and still 
forms the basis of similar theories concerning the origin of 
Christianity. 

II. This literature contains a romantic narrative in which 
St. Clement in his travels meets with relative after relative 
whom he had lost — hence called the ' Recognitions ' — and a 
set of Homilies, containing a great deal of Ebionitish doctrine, 
and a letter of St. Clement to St. James, which forms a sort 
of preface to the version which obtained currency in Rome. In 
this letter St. Clement says incidentally that he was ordained 
by Peter, a fact which by no means forms a prominent feature 
of the narrative, and is accompanied in the same breath with 
the statement that he was commissioned by Peter to send 
certain sermons to St. James, as the head of the Christian 
Church. The position of St. James as the bishop of bishops 
is an important feature of the letter. 'Taken as a whole, 
the Clementine Romance is/ as Mr. Puller admits, ' entirely 
un-Petrine and un-Roman.' 1 Its whole tendency is also 
anti-Pauline — depreciatory, that is, of St. Paul as com- 
pared with St. James, in accordance with the Ebionitish 
doctrine which placed St. James before either St. Peter or St. 
Paul. It is supposed to have appeared in Rome either in the 
middle or the end of the second, or in the beginning of the 

1 Puller's (F.W.) The Primitive Saint* and the See of Rome, p. 45. 



Digitized by 



—800 



AND NOW BY OTHERS, 



13 



third century, or later still. It was never quoted as an au- 
thority by early Christian writers, but nevertheless obtained 
after a while an extensive circulation. It is written with skill 
and popular effect. To this day most of its readers will admit 
that there is a certain fascination about it, viewed merely as 
a romance. 

HI. Its anti- Pauline tendency was seized upon by Baur 
and the Tubingen school in general, and vastly exaggerated ; 
and having been thus interpreted, was made to do service in 
connection with a passage in Holy Scripture which has, from 
the earliest days of Christianity, been pressed into the service 
of unbelief. The state of things supposed to be described in 
the Clementine Eomance was held to be a survival of the 
state of matters which obtained in the early Church, as shown, 
according to this theory, by the conflict between St. Peter 
and St. Paul at Antioch. The difference between these two 
Apostles was held to be vital, instead of concerning only a 
matter of practical expediency; and so, according to this 
theory, the early Church began with a conflict as to the truth 
to be taught, of which we have the remnants in the Clementine 
literature. Every effort was therefore made to throw back 
the Clementine Eomance into the second century, and as far 
back in that century as possible. 

It would be outside the subject of this book to enter upon 
the complete and decisive answers which have been given by 
Christian writers to the nationalist school of Tubingen on 
this head. 

IV. But this spurious Clementine literature is, as I have 
said, now pressed into the service of anti-Papal writers. Dr. 
Salmon, Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, one of the most 
vigorous opponents of the Papal claims, whilst he exposes the 
weakness of the Rationalists' deductions from the Clementine 
literature, nevertheless rounds off one of his paragraphs with 
the assertion that it ' has had a marvellous share in shaping 
the history of Christendom, by inventing the story that Peter 
was Bishop of Borne, and that he named Clement to succeed 
him in the see.' 1 He expresses the same theory elsewhere, 

1 Irtirod. to the N. T. fourth edition, 1889, p. 15. The italics in this and 
the following quotations are my own, 




14 



TO ACCOUNT FOR THE EXPRESSION, a.d. 06 



saying that as regards the story of Peter's Roman episcopate, 
* the real inventor of the story was an editor of the Clementine 
Romance. . . . Though the doctrinal teaching of the Clemen- 
tines was rejected as heretical, the narrative part of the book 
was readily believed.' He gives no proof of this, but con- 
tinues, 1 and in particular this story of Clement's ordination 
by Peter was felt to be so honourable to the Church of Rome 
that it was at once adopted there, and has been the traditional 
Roman account ever since.' 1 Dr. Lightfoot adopted the 
same theory, stating that ' its glorification of Rome and the 
Roman Bishop obtained for it an early and wide circulation in 
the West. Accordingly, even Tertullian speaks of Clement as 
the immediate successor of St. Peter.' 2 I would gladly give 
this author's proof, but I have been unable to find anything 
but assertion on this whole subject. The present Bishop of 
Lincoln has recently adopted the same position in his preface * 
to Mr. Puller's book on ' The Primitive Saints and the See of 
Roma' Dr. King is speaking, indeed, of a theory which no 
one, that I have been able to discover, ever held, viz. that 
St. Peter was the * sole founder of the Roman See.' But it is 
evident that he alludes to the theory of St. Peter being held to 
have been the first Bishop of Rome, and he proceeds to say, 
referring to Mr. Puller's book (pp. 48, 49), that 'the anti-Pauline 
Clementine Romance may explain the source from which this 
invention was derived.' Mr. Puller himself has made it the 
pivot of his argument against Rome. ' If the author of the 
Clementine Romance had not been an Ebionitish heretic, with 
an inherited hatred of the memory of St. Paul, the world would 
never have h eard of the chair of Peter. It is strange how, from the 
very first, the Roman claims have been based upon forgeries.' 4 
And when he comes to the crucial passage in St. Cyprian's 
writings, where that saint speaks of the See of Rome as ' the 
Chair of Peter and the principal Church whence sacerdotal 
unity took its rise,' he dismisses St. Cyprian from his array 

1 Salmon's Infallibility of the Church, second edition, 1890, p. 360. 
8 St. Clement of Rome, edition 1890, vol. i. p. 64. 

* P. xxi. Dr. King is here endeavouring to make room for our * honesty.' 
But he starts with imputing to us the above theory, which no Catholic theo- 
logian ever held. 

4 Puller's The Primitive Saints, p. 50. 




—300 



' SEE OF peter; 



15 



of witnesses on this point, as under a prevailing delusion. 
* / need say nothing about the expression, " Chair of Peter," 
as applied to the See of Borne. By the time of St. Cyprian 
Western Christians had learnt from the Clementine Romance 
to apply the title to the Boman See.' 1 Mr. Puller goes 
further (if his words are to be taken seriously) than his pre- 
decessors, for he says, ' No one had any suspicion that the 
Clementine Romance was a lie invented by a heretic,' for 
which there is no proof given ; and, further, ' the story was 
accepted on all sides.' In other words, the whole Church 
believed that St. James was its visible head ! ' Some,' he 
continues, * like St. Cyprian, accepted it, but without allowing 
it to modify to any appreciable degree the traditional teach- 
ing of the Church. Others, more closely connected with the 
Church of Borne, 8 fastened on the notion of the chair of 
Peter, and used that notion to provide an apostolic basis for 
the growing claims of the Boman See.' It is difficult to see 
how they would secure ' an apostolic basis ' by extruding 
St. Paul. For the twin Apostles include St. Peter. It was 
not, therefore, a substitution of St. Peter for St. Paul, but of 
St. Peter for St. Peter and St. Paul. 

V. But the Clementine literature is a subject which deserves 
a somewhat fuller treatment. I shall accordingly endeavour 
to show that, supposing ' the corporate pride of the Boman 
Christians ' could be reasonably imagined to be so 'flattered' 
by the 1 unique position which it [this romance] assigned to 
Clement,' which is Dr. Lightfoot's explanation, it has not been 
conclusively proved that this romance was the first to call 
St. Clement the successor of Peter in the bishopric of Borne. 
It may be shown that there was something else before it — 
namely, the lists of the Bishops of Borne. 

But before entering on this proof I feel that it is necessary 
to enter a protest against the assumption virtually made by 
some that the local Church of Borne was in that early age 
filled with the spirit of the devil. How could this be, if, with 
Dr. Lightfoot and others, we explain the position of superiority 
accorded to the Church of Borne by her moral majesty ? She 

1 Prim. SS. p. 54. * Tertullian, for instance, St Cyprian's master. 




16 



THE IMPOSSIBILITY OF THIS, FOR 



A.D. 96 



presided * in love/ is his interpretation of irpoKaOrjfrfpr) rf}* 
The possibility of such a translation of St. Igna- 
tius' words is not now the question; but so Dr. Lightfoot 
explains her position. This * practical goodness/ as he chooses 
to translate the supernatural gift of ayany, 1 enabled her, 
according to these writers, to take, and justified her in taking 
the lead, and led others to acquiesce in a kind of primacy, 
This (they tell us), together with her position as the Imperial 
city, went to form her unique position. Was, then, the Church 
of Borne, the leading Church according to all these writers, so 
filled with the spirit of lying that she could take the suggestion 
of a romance in place of her own lists, which we know from 
Hegesippus she then possessed, whether by oral tradition or in 
writing ? 2 Had she the heart to alter her tale, to drop the 
Apostle in whom she had gloried, and in whom, conjointly 
with St. Peter, she glories to-day, sending out her bulls in 
their twin name? — had she, I say, the heart suddenly to change 
her attitude towards her known and beloved founders ? Did 
Tertullian, when he came to Home, instead of examining the 
lists, instead of listening to what older men could tell him, 
take up with an incidental expression in a romance, which no 
single writer of that time ever quoted, so far as our records go, 
as an authority, and of which they rejected the heretical 
teaching, according to Dr. Salmon ? Could all classes in the 
Church of Borne agree suddenly on a new platform, and no 
whisper of the fundamental change find its way outside, or 
produce the slightest protest against this change in the 
Church's idea of her own constitution ? Is it reason, is it 
common sense, to suppose that in twenty years, which is the 
utmost space of time that is given, 3 a change so vital was 
effected, as that the episcopal chair was no longer what it is 
assumed by these writers to have been, that of the two 
Apostles, but of one only ? 

But further, why should the 'corporate pride of the Boman 
Christians * be so flattered by the story of St. Clement being 
so prominent, and having been ordained by St. Peter, that it 
1 hoc. cit. p. 71. 

* Hegesippus' expression, StaftoxV Arofipra may imply that there was no 
written official list But he found at least a reliable oral tradition. 

• Prim. 88. p. 48. 



Digitized by 



—800 



IT IMPLIES IMPOSSIBLE COLLUSION. 



17 



henceforth adopted the idea of the see being that of Peter 
and not that of Peter and Paul ? Was, then, St. Peter so far 
above St. Paul that it would flatter their corporate pride to 
call it the see of Peter instead of the see of both ? Was the glo- 
rification of St. Clement sufficient to balance the depreciation 
of St. Peter, in the same narrative, below St. James ? And 
could Rome ever bear any approach to an Ebionitish view of 
the Apostle of the Gentiles ? Again, who are the writers who 
were thus, on Mr. Puller's theory, deluded ? Men like Ter- 
tullian, who belonged to the Church of Carthage ! But is it 
conceivable that Tertullian, with his forensic ability, the first 
Christian writer of the day, who had been at Rome before the 
year 200, had never heard of what these writers suppose to 
have been the earlier teaching, viz. that the See of Rome 
was not the See of Peter, but merely founded by the two 
Apostles, and that neither of these Apostles held to it any 
relationship different from the other? Or if they knew 
of this supposed earlier teaching, can we conceive of their 
deliberately falsifying or ignoring it without a word of ex- 
planation ? Is this the way in which the phrase, which was 
henceforth common to all ages, sprang into existence ? If so, 
the expression ' the chair of Peter ' must be considered the 
symbol of the Church's utter inability to extrude a seriously 
erroneous doctrine. 

Such are the insuperable philosophical difficulties in the 
theory that the Clementine Romance gave birth to the doctrine 
that the See of Rome is the See of Peter. There are, how- 
ever, critical obstacles besides. 

VI. We know that Rome possessed at least two lists of her 
bishops before the Clementine Romance appeared on the scene. 
In the reign of Eleutherius, 1 a converted Jew, named Hegesip- 
pus, came from Syria to Rome for the purpose of inquiring 
particularly into the lists of bishops from the Apostles' time. 
He desired, above all things, to establish the connection be- 
tween the series of bishops and the Apostles in each case, in 
the East and in the West. Eusebius (not a Roman writer) 
wrote with the list as made out by Hegesippus under his eye. 



1 A.D, 175-189. 



o 




18 



CRITICAL DIFFICULTIES. 



a.d. 96 



What, then, is the evidence supplied in this matter by 
Eusebius ? 

But first we must be clear as to what it is that we are 
engaged in proving. Catholic theology, then, has always 
spoken of the See of Borne as, in some sense, the See of the 
two Apostles, Peter and Paul. We join these two Apostles 
together in all our thoughts concerning Borne, when we wish 
to be precise and explanatory. Borne has inherited from St. 
Paul the merits of his martyrdom and a peculiar inheritance 
of watchful care, as her patron conjointly with St. Peter. 
But from St. Peter she has inherited his character of founda- 
tion in a unique sense, as compared with the other Apostles 
(who are also foundations), and that possession of the keys 
which was bestowed on Peter. This possession of the keys is 
something beyond their mere use and exercise, such as the 
rest of the Apostles received for the purposes of their tem- 
porary mission, as founders of Churches throughout the 
world. Those who do not belong to us are not generally 
aware that we never commemorate St. Peter in the Holy Mass, 
or the other sacred offices of the Church, without immediately 
also commemorating St. Paul, nor St. Paul without at once 
adding a memorial of St. Peter. The Feast of June 29 is 
not with us the Feast of St. Peter, as it is in the calendar of 
the English Church, it is the Feast of St. Peter and St. 
Paul. And every Pope sends forth his bulls in the name of 
the two Apostles. As, then, a person could not argue from 
the latter fact that the See of Borne is not held by us to be 
in a special sense the See of Peter, so neither could one argue 
from a mention in any early writer of a relationship of the 
See of Borne to the two Apostles that such a writer did not 
also believe in a special relationship to the Apostle Peter on 
the part of the same see. To prove similarity of teaching 
between primitive and modern Borne, we should look for the 
use of both expressions. This is exactly what we do find in 
Tertullian, who speaks of Borne as the see into which the 
Apostles Peter and Paul 1 poured all doctrine (totam doctri- 
nam),' and says at the same time that St. Clement was 
ordained to it by St. Peter. 1 Tertullian, I notice in passing, 



1 Dc Prcescr. Hcbt. 32 (a.d. 200). 




—300 



HEGESIPPUS' LIST OF BISHOPS, 



19 



does not say that St. Clement was the immediate successor of 
St. Peter, but simply that St. Clement, Bishop of Eome 
(whom all the world knew, and who was the teacher of others), 
was ordained by St. Peter himself. This is all that his argu- 
ment requires, since it is to establish the apostolicity of the 
Church of Rome. It was necessary for this purpose to show 
not only that it was founded by two Apostles, but that they 
both, or (which was at the least the same thing) one of 
them, had instituted a successor, as in the case of the other 
Churches which he mentions. 

And now to return to Eusebius. Dr. Lightfoot 1 has fur- 
nished us with a most exhaustive critical investigation of the 
relationship between the list made out by Hegesippus and 
the History and Chronicle of Eusebius, and has gone far to 
prove that the latter had the very list of Hegesippus in his 
hand, through the medium of a Syrian writer in the time of 
Elagabalus, named Julius Africanus. But that he had, some- 
how, the list of Hegesippus may be deduced from his own 
words. 

What, then, does Eusebius, resting on the list made by 
Hegesippus in the middle of the second century, say concern- 
ing the relationship of St. Clement to St. Peter ? 

There is now no question as to his making him the next 
but one to Linus. What, then, was the relationship of Linus 
to Peter ? 

There are two sources from which we gather the witness 
of Eusebius — his History and his Chronicle. In his History 
he says 2 that Linus was the first appointed to the bishopric 
of the Church of the Romans after the martyrdom of Paul 
and Peter. This is an expression which decides nothing ; for 
we should say that Henry III. was the first king of England 
after John, meaning to include John amongst the kings. The 
word ' after ' may be used of a successor in the same chair, 
the first successor being called the first bishop after the origi- 
nal occupant. 

1 See the whole of the interesting discussion on the 4 early Roman succes- 
sion ' (pp. 201-845) in his Clerncnt of Rome, vol. i. Every line will repay 
perusal. 

1 II. E. iii. 2. 



c 2 




20 



INCORPORATED BY EUSEBIUS, 



a.d. 96 



But immediately afterwards Eusebius uses an expression 
which suggests a difference of relationship between St. Peter 
and St. Paul to the bishopric of Borne. For he says 1 that 
Linus obtained the bishopric of the Church of the Bomans 
1 first after Peter* Here we have Peter alone connected with 
the bishopric. But further on there is another expression, 
when he speaks of Clement as 'holding the third place of 
those who acted as bishop after both Paul and Peter.* 2 Here 
the series of bishops obviously begins with Linus, but the 
exact relationship to the two Apostles is not defined. In 
another later passage 3 he speaks of Telesphorus as receiving 
the bishopric ' seventh from the Apostles/ which may mean 
after their death, or in succession to them. 

So far, then, Eusebius is found to speak ordinarily of 
Linus, coming after the Apostles, as the first bishop, but on 
one occasion he speaks of him as the successor of Peter alone. 
Both are true, according to the teaching of theology. 

But besides his History, Eusebius drew up a Chronicle, 
which appears to have contained the list from which he took 
that which he gives in his History. This is a matter of 
general agreement. But that Chronicle is not extant. We 
have only a few extracts in Syncellus, a Greek writer of the 
ninth century, and three versions in other languages — viz. 
Armenian, Latin, and Syriac. The first of these, the Arme- 
nian, was, according to Petermann, who has translated it into 
Latin, 4 from two sources — the original Greek and a Syriac 
translation. The first part, according to Petermann, with 
whom Lightfoot agrees so far, 5 is from the original Greek. In 
this, whilst Clement is counted as third from the Apostles, 
there is a passage of supreme importance, in which the writer 
says : ' The Apostle Peter, when he had first founded the 
Church of Antioch, sets out for the city of Borne, and there 
preaches the gospel, and stays there as prelate of the Church 
for twenty years.' 6 It also so happens that we have this very 
passage in the original preserved by Syncellus : ' but he [i.e. 

*H.E.ui.4. f iii.21. » iv. 6, 

4 It can be seen in the British Museum in A. Sohoene's beautiful edition, 
in which the various versions are placed side by side, 
* Loc. tit. p. 213. • ii. 160. 




—300 



MAKES ROME 



21 



Peter], besides the Church in Antioch, also first presided over 
that in Home until his death.' 1 

And the Latin version by St. Jerome confirms this, for St. 
Jerome, who made the translation, says of Peter, • He is sent 
to Rome, where, preaching the gospel for twenty-five years, 
he perseveres as bishop of the same city.' And yet St. 
Jerome calls Linus * the first bishop after Peter.' Thus the 
Chronicle of Eusebius coincides with the History. St. Peter 
was Bishop of Rome, but being an Apostle also, the bishops 
are sometimes counted from Linus 2 and not from the Apostle, 
sometimes from one Apostle, sometimes from both. 

The Syriac version again confirms the Armenian and 
Latin on this particular point. It has an excerpt from the 
Chronicon, which says that ' Peter, after he had established 
the Church at Antioch, presided over the Church at Rome for 
twenty years.' 

The later Greek and Oriental chronographies establish the 
same point. Cardinal Mai published one which was drawn up 
professedly ' from the labours of Eusebius,' in which the lists 
of bishops open with the statement, ' Peter first acted as 
bishop (hrecrtcoTrqarev) in Rome,' whilst in the same century 
Nicephorus, the Patriarch of Constantinople, gives a list of 
' those who acted as bishops in Rome from Christ and the 
Apostles — I. Peter the Apostle.' 

Dr. Lightfoot has (it seems to the present writer) proved 
that both the History and the Chronicon of Eusebius derived 
their lists from Hegesippus. 

But not only so. He seems to have established another 
point of great importance for our present purpose, and that is 
the connection between a passage in Epiphanius and the 
original list of Hegesippus. He thinks that this list really 
appears in Epiphanius, ' Haer.' xxvii. 6. Now St. Epiphanius 
speaks of both Peter and Paul as at once Apostles and Bishops 
in Rome, and gives the name of Linus next. He then goes on 
to explain how it was that although St. Clement was a con- 

1 6 l\ abrbs fura rrjs iv 'AvTioxfy iiacKrialas ietd rrjs tv 'Pcfyoj xp&ros xpo4<rrri 
imt T<Afi&rc»f abrov (ibid.). 

* This must not be understood as though Linus, Bishop of Borne, did not 
succeed to the pontificate of the Universal Church; but the apostolate was 
something besides that. 




22 



THE SEE OF PETER, AND 



a.d. 96 



temporary of the two Apostles, yet the others succeeded 4 to 
the episcopate before him,' viz. Linos and Cletns. Here, then, 
according to some very satisfactory reasons given by Dr. 
Lightfoot, we are in closest contact with Hegesippus, who 
wrote, be it remembered, in the middle of the second century. 
And the writer who is considered to give us most directly and 
unquestionably the results of Hegesippus' work in Rome is 
also the writer who enters most largely into the question of 
St. Clement's relationship to St. Peter. He was, according to 
St. Epiphanius, ordained by that Apostle, but could not be 
prevailed upon to take upon himself the responsibility of the 
sole episcopate on their death, until, Linus and detus having 
both died, he was at last ' forced ' into it. It is, of course, 
only conjecture that the subject of Clement filled a special 
place in the ' memorials 9 of Hegesippus, as it did in St. 
Epiphanius' work; but, supposing this to be the case, we have 
another side-light thrown on the prominence which the name 
of St. Clement obtained in the East, whence came the Clemen- 
tine Romance. Hegesippus was himself a Syrian Christian, 
who visited Corinth and Rome. Julius Africanus, through 
whom Eusebius derived his knowledge of Hegesippus' work, 
was a native of Emmaus. And the Clementine Romance 
hailed, in its original dress, also from the East. 

The result of all that has been said is, that what we can 
glean from Eusebius and St. Epiphanius concerning Hege- 
sippus' work, which was written in the middle of the second 
century, points to a belief already established, that St. 
Clement, at whatever interval, occupied ' the chair of Peter ' — 
a belief, therefore, which was in existence before the Clemen- 
tine Romance could, on any theory, have made its appearance 
in Rome or the West. 

VII. But there is one more witness, and that of the first 
importance, viz. St. Irenaeus himself. 

In his list of the Bishops of Rome we have again, accord- 
ing to Dr. Lightfoot, the same work of Hegesippus, though 
this is denied by many scholars. However, the witness of St. 
Irenseus is of importance in itself, because it is often supposed 
to contradict that of Tertullian. 1 But that is an idea which 



1 St. Clem, of Borne, Lightfoot, p. 204. 




—300 



ST. IREN.EUS DOES THE SAAIE. 



23 



arises simply from a misinterpretation. In his first mention 
of the succession of the Bishops of Borne (' Haer.' i. 27, 1), St. 
Irenseus speaks of Hyginus as the ninth, which makes St. 
Peter the first, as Hyginus was the eighth after the Apostle. 
He repeats this on another occasion (' Hser.' iii. 4, 8). Dr. 
Lightfoot here conjectures that the reading may be wrong ; 
but admits that ' all the authorities are agreed ' as to the cor- 
rectness of the reading. His only reason for supposing that 
the reading may be wrong seems to be that it does not fit in 
with his theory that St. Peter ought not to be counted as a 
Bishop. The reading appears in St. Cyprian, Eusebius, and 
St. Epiphanius. But St. Irenseus also says in another pas- 
sage (' Hser.' iii. 4, 8) that the Apostles Peter and Paul en- 
trusted the ministry of the episcopate to Linus, and that 
Clement came 'third/ This seeming contradiction is ex- 
plained by the consideration mentioned above, viz. that 
Linus might be called first after Peter, or second, according as 
the writer meant to speak of those who were only Bishops as 
one body by themselves, by reason of the apostolate of St. 
Peter, or of the bishops as actually commencing with him who 
was Apostle and Bishop all in one. The episcopate of Linus, 
although inheriting the peculiar powers of St. Peter's episco- 
pate, i.e. of his universal pontificate (though not of his 
apostolate considered in its fullest sense), would naturally be 
due to the joint action of the two Apostles. 

Thus the see was founded by the two Apostles ; the first 
person who was bishop without being one of the Twelve was 
appointed by their common action. This bishop inherited 
those features of St. Peter's apostolate which were special to 
him, and accordingly he might be spoken of either as the 
second Bishop of Borne, or the first after Peter, or the first after 
the martyrdom of the two Apostles, or, in fine, the first after 
Peter and Paul, Apostles and Bishops : the former because 
of the relationship of St. Peter to Borne as the originator of its 
universal pontificate, the latter because of the connection of 
St. Paul with Borne as fellow-labourer with the Prince of the 
Apostles, and its joint patron in the courts of Heaven. No 
one of these terms excludes the other. St. Irenseus does not 
contradict Tertullian, nor Tertullian St. Irenseus. A see 




24 



TERTULLIAN MISUNDERSTOOD. 



a.b. 96 



founded by two Apostles is not necessarily the see of both or 
either. The expression settles nothing. St. Gregory founded 
the See of London, but was not its bishop. If it seemed 
good to one Apostle to take the See of Borne under his special 
care, and form to it a special relationship, there would be 
nothing in the fact of the foundation of the community having 
been due to co-operation to prevent his so doing. It cannot be 
said that St. James founded the See of Jerusalem, and yet he 
was its first bishop. And, conversely, although St. Paul, 
coming on to the scene after St. Peter, assisted in the founda- 
tion of the organisation of the Christian community at Borne, 
it was not necessary that he should also be its bishop in the 
same sense as St. Peter. 

Why, then, should Tertullian speak of Clement as ordained 
by St. Peter if Linus was the first bishop ? The two facts I 
have shown are not mutually exclusive. There is nothing 
unreasonable in the first part of the explanation given by 
Bufinus in his preface to his translation of the Clementine 
Becognitions, viz. ' Linus and Cletus were indeed bishops in 
the city of Borne before Clement, but during the lifetime of 
Peter, that is to say, so that they bore the care of the 
episcopate, whilst he fulfilled the office of the apostolate.' 1 We 
must, however, add that they also reigned after St. Peter, and 
when it came to the successor of the Apostle, now in glory, 
one must come before the other, and whether from humility, 
as St. Epiphanius thought, or from whatever other cause, St. 
Clement came third. But it is more likely that it was settled 
by the two Apostles that Linus should be the first successor 
of Peter before their death, and hence the account in St. 
IrensBus. They did not, they could not, hand on precisely 
their own position, for they were Apostles ; but 4 they com- 
mitted the ministry of the episcopate to Linus ' (' Hser.' iii. 8, 8) . 
St. Clement, however, especially from his great Epistle, filled 
a place in men's eyes which the others did not, and so for 
Tertullian's purpose it would be enough to say that he was 
ordained by St. Peter, not thereby excluding the other two. 
Tertullian wished to insist on the succession of doctrine, and 
mentions the connection between the well-known Clement and 



1 H. E. iii. p. 4. 




—300 



THE CLEMENTINE ROMANCE 



25 



St. Peter as sufficient. He received the bishopric from St. 
Peter, whether as first or third was not material to the 
point. 

VIII. But this is not all. The question now occurs, When 
did the Clementine literature appear in Rome ? Was it be- 
fore Tertullian wrote ? The Tubingen school did its best to 
force the composition of these writings as far back in the 
second century as the middle. The Bishop of Lincoln (Pref. 
to * Prim. SS.' p. xxi.) fathers Mr. Puller's theory, which is 
apparently the same as that of Dr. Lightfoot, and nearly that 
of Dr. Salmon. The latter writer renders his own theory 
more difficult to maintain, by making this literature 'not 
older than the very end of the second century,' 1 in at any rate 
the form in which it appeared at Borne. In this case it would 
have been contemporaneous with Tertullian's account, and 
one does not see how Tertullian could possibly have gone 
counter to the supposed older tradition at once. Mr. Puller 
speaks of its appearance at Borne as ' an event which probably 
intervened between the time of St. Irenseus' treatise and the 
time of St. Cyprian,' * which is too vague for his thesis. 
Accordingly he settles its date further on, purely, however, 
on the grounds of his own assumption as to the effect of that 
literature. He says, 4 There is much reason for supposing ' 
(but, like Dr. Lightfoot, he does not give the reasons for this, 
which is the pivot of the whole argument) 4 that the notion 
that St. Peter himself consecrated Clement to the Boman See 
is wholly due to the Clementine Bomance, and therefore that ro- 
mance must have established its influence in Borne some time 
during the last twenty years of the second century, between 
the year 180, which is the approximate date of the treatise 
of St. Irenaeus, and the year 200, which is the approximate 
date of the treatise of Tertullian.' 3 

Mr. Puller realises the importance of establishing a date 
for the Clementine literature anterior to Tertullian's account 
of Peter having ordained Clement. And it is not too much to 
say that the argument of his book altogether halts if this 

1 Inirod. to N.T. fourth edition, p. 14. The italics are my own. 
» Prim. 88. p. 44. 

* Ibid. p. 48. The italics are my own. 




26 



FIRST APPEARED IN ROME 



a.d. 96 



cannot be established. The ' very end ' of the century, which 
Dr. Salmon gives as its date, will not really serve the purpose ; 
for who could believe that a new novel, making St. James the 
head of the whole Church, could in a year or two, or in five 
years, induce the Soman Christians to tell such a lie on 
behalf of their ' corporate pride ' as to ignore their older lists 
and (supposed) older tradition on the authority of a book 
written in the interests of Ebionitism ? 

There is, however, an interesting piece of evidence which 
goes far to prove that neither the Tubingen Rationalists nor 
the anti-Papal writers are correct in assigning this Clemen- 
tine literature to any part of the second century. In the 9th 
book of the ' Recognitions ' of Clement, as preserved in Rufinus* 
translation, there are nearly ten chapters which are almost 
identical (in many places absolutely so) with a treatise of 
which Eusebius gives a copious extract, written by a Syriac 
theologian named Bardesanes, born at Edessa, and famous for 
his philosophico-theological speculations. The Syriac original 
of the treatise, of which Eusebius gives the extracts in Greek, 
was discovered by the late Canon Cureton in 1848 and pub- 
lished in 1855. Cureton thought that Bardesanes 1 himself 
wrote the treatise, but it was possibly written by a disciple of 
his, who incorporated the arguments of a treatise of his 
master. So that in that case what follows would apply to 
the substance of the Bardesanes dialogue, not to its form. 
But I will speak of it as Bardesanes'. 2 

The first question that arises is, which borrowed from the 
other — Bardesanes from the Greek 'Recognitions,' or the 
' Recognitions ' from Bardesanes ? Dr. Hort points out what 

1 His proper name is Bardaisan. See a valuable article on this Eastern 
writer in Smith and Wace's Diet of Chr. Biogr. by Dr. Hort. 

* I.e. by way of giving to the maintainers of the earlier date the benefit of 
the doubt. I have no doubt myself that the writing is that of a disciple. I 
have not discussed the only supposition that would militate against the follow- 
ing contention as to the date— the supposition, namely, that an earlier form of 
the Clementine Romance reached Home, and that the chapters from the treatise 
of Bardesanes were added in a subsequent edition. Probably no critic would 
maintain that. And it must be remembered that the crucial passage about 
Clement occurs in the Epistle to James, which is obviously the covering letter, 
so to speak, to the Recognitions, and no part of an earlier original. Rufinus, 
who had the original in his hands, expressly says that it was of later date. 




—800 



IN THE TII1RD CENTURY, 



27 



most people will consider one adequate reason for believing 
that the ' Recognitions ' borrowed from Bardesanes. 1 The 
Syriac original of Bardesanes ' contains various names and 
particulars pointing towards a Mesopotamia^ origin, which 
are obliterated partially m the Greek dialogue and 3till more in 
the " Recognitions." ' If, therefore, we considered the ' Recog- 
nitions ' to be the original, we should have to suppose that Barde- 
sanes took the matter from them and inserted these names and 
other particulars into his Syriac narrative as he went along. 
On the other hand, if the treatise or dialogue of Bardesanes 
(or his disciple) is the original, from which the writer of the 
' Recognitions ' borrowed these chapters, he did what was only 
natural, viz. dropped the allusions to Mesopotamia in giving 
the narrative its Greek dress, a process usual with a compiler 
such as the author of the ' Recognitions ' appears to have been, 
and even with a mere translator who might wish to recom- 
mend the story to Western minds. Probably few scholars will 
hesitate which theory to adopt. So that the 9th book of the 
'Recognitions' maybe said with good reason to have been 
taken from the famous treatise of Bardesanes. 2 

It only remains to determine the date of the original 
treatise or dialogue of Bardesanes. Now, there is a lengthy 
note of great value on this subject appended to an article by 
II. Priaulx 3 on « Indian Embassies to Rome, from the Reign of 
Claudius to the Death of Justinian,' contributed to the 1 Journal 
of the British Asiatic Society,' in 1862, p. 289. The article is 
not written with reference to our present subject, but purely 
from an antiquarian point of view. M. Priaulx is showing 
reason why the date assigned to Bardesanes' writings by the 
early Christian writers is erroneous. His name is connected 
by these writers with Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Verus, and 
Marcus Antoninus, to whom Eusebius says Bardesanes pre- 
sented a copy of his book, adding that he wrote it in con- 
sequence of the persecutions of the Christians by Marcus 
(a.d. 167-177), and about the time that Soter, Bishop of 

1 hoc. eil. 

* The consensus of scholars is in favour of the Eastern origin of the 
Clementine Romance as against Baur. 

* Referred to by Dr. Hort, loc. cit. I have given a fuller account of this. 




28 



AND COULD NOT HAVE CHEATED a.d, 96 



Eome, died (a.d. 179). Now, Bardesanes was born a.d. 154. 1 
He was, therefore, only seven years old when Antoninus Pius 
died, and twenty-five when Soter died. But when he wrote 
the dialogue in question, or its substance (if it was that of his 
disciple Philip in its present form), he was able to allude to a 
former work of his, which makes it probable that he was in 
middle age. But there is a note of time, which forces us to 
place the earliest limit of the treatise considerably later. It 
says that * as yesterday the Romans took Arabia and abrogated 
all their ancient laws, and more especially that circumcision 
with which they were circumcised.' This could only refer to 
the conquest by Trajan (167), or by Severus (196), (cf. Eutro- 
pius, iii. 18), when Arabia was reduced to a province. In the 
one case Bardesanes would be only thirteen; consequently 
we must suppose that he wrote, not then, but soon after the 
death of Severus (a.d. 211). If we suppose this treatise to have 
been written in 214, it would have been written eighteen 
years after the conquest, and at the age of sixty. Now, at 
that time the Emessine Elagabalus was on the throne, who 
specially affected the name of Antoninus. Nothing would 
be more natural than for Bardesanes to present his book to 
the emperor, and to address him as Antoninus, the name by 
which he was known in Syria. Further, it would be most 
probable that the Christians would know of the honour of the 
book being thus presented, whilst it would also be most 
natural that amongst subsequent writers a confusion should 
arise a? to the name Antoninus, as its application to Elaga- 
balus was not known at that time, so far as we can tell, in 
Greece or Borne. Hence the mistaken transference of date 
to the time of the Antonines in the second century by Euse- 
bius and others. 

By this ingenious conjecture, based on sound principles, 
new light seems to be thrown on the date of the ' Recognitions/ 
and Dr. Hort is probably quite correct in his estimate of that 
date. They could not have appeared at Rome until well into 
the third century. Consequently the theory of the writers 
with whom I have been dealing, as to Tertullian having 
adopted the incidental notice in the Clementine Romance 



Edessene Chronicle, a.d. 154. 




—300 



THE TERM 4 SEE OF PETER/ 



29 



about St. Clement having been appointed to the Chair of 
Peter, must be dismissed, and some other more solid ground 
for that writer's assertion must be adopted. No other needs 
to be sought than the list of the Bishops of Borne, which 
Hegesippus found in existence, whether orally or otherwise, 
in the middle of the second century, which, according to 
Eusebius, made Linus, Anencletus, and Clement all suc- 
cessors of St. Peter. There would be no difficulty in supposing 
that St. Peter ordained Clement, whether we accepted St. 
Epiphanius' explanation or not. 

IX. There is also no difficulty in supposing that the 
Clementine literature, on being introduced into the West, 
would contain what I may now assume to be the common tradi- 
tion of the West as to St. Clement having been ordained by 
St. Peter, although thinking him to be the first successor, as an 
Eastern story well might ; whereas the idea that, in order to 
depreciate St. Paul, the Ebionitish writer made Borne the 
See of Peter only, and so determined the whole future of the 
Church, first misleading the keen apologist Tertullian into 
assuming as the common teaching of the Church an heretical 
trick of less than twenty years' standing, is in the highest 
degree improbable from the view of merely natural criticism ; 
but when we look at it from the supernatural view of the 
Church, as the Body of Christ and the home of the Spirit of 
Truth, and remember that, according to the admission of all, 
the Church of Borne, the leading Church from any point of 
view, the Church which, according to Dr. Lightfoot, owed her 
great position to her moral ascendency, as well as to her secular 
position : when, I say, we remember that she, the centre of 
the Christian world, adopted that view of her relationship to 
St. Peter which is implied in the supposition of this ordina- 
tion, viz. that she is 'the chair of Peter,' then the theory 
that ' the corporate pride ' of the Boman Christians led them 
to a guilty participation in a mere falsehood becomes quite 
untenable. 

Novels are often based on facts, or at any rate contain a 
certain number of historical facts ; and it is unreasonable to 
assume that every statement in the Clementine Bomance is 
untrue because it is a work of fiction. Anyhow, Tertullian 




30 AND IT COULD NOT START IT UNLESS a.d. 9t5 



in a.d. 199 or 200, could not have derived his ideas from a 
romance which does not seem to have reached Home before 
the time of Elagabalus, i.e. well into the third century. 

It results, then, from what has gone before, that (i.) St. 
Iren®us taught that, whilst the See of Rome was founded by 
the two Apostles, Peter and Paul, it was also in a special 
sense the See of Peter; that (ii.) so far as we can glean 
anything positive from Eusebius about the list of the Bishops 
of Rome, drawn up by Hegesippus in the middle of the 
second century, it also included a special relationship of St. 
Peter to that see ; that (in.) Tertullian, after or during his 
visit to Rome, wrote as an ascertained fact that St. Clement 
was ordained by St. Peter, although he does not say that he 
was his immediate successor ; that (iv.) the Clementine litera- 
ture reached Rome after Tertullian had left ; and that (v.) in 
its Western dress it wove into its tale the common tradition 
of the West to which Tertullian had made allusion. 

Note. — Since writing the above I have seen a very able essay 
on the Clementine literature in the 'Studia Biblica' (vol. ii.), 
edited by Professors Driver, Cheyne, and Sanday. The writer, 
Dr. Bigg, considers that Uhlhorn has conclusively proved the 
Eastern origin of this literature, and that 4 there can be no reason- 
able doubt * that the work called the 4 Homilies • 4 was well known to 
the author of the 44 Recognitions " ' (p. 188). He shows, as others 
before him, that there must have been an earlier form on which both 
the 4 Homilies ' and the 4 Recognitions ' drew, and says that this 4 must 
not be fixed too early.' He suggests about a.d. 200. But his only 
reason for this seems to be his assumption that 4 the Clement 
legend,' in which he seems to include the ordination by Peter, was 
contained in the older form. Dr. Salmon, rightly, denies this 
(' Diet, of Chr.Biog.' art. Clem. Lit. p. 511). Dr. Bigg admits that 
the argument against heathenism is of a late type. As yet, how- 
ever, not a shadow of proof has been produced that the earlier 
original of the 4 Homilies * and 4 Recognitions ' appeared at Rome. 
Much less can it be supposed, in the face of Rufinus' statement to 
the contrary, that the letter of St. Clement, which mentions his 
ordination by St. Peter, belonged to the earlier original. The 
4 Recognitions ' is, obviously, the form in which the literature first 
appeared at Rome, and the said letter of Clement was, as Dr. 
Salmon says, 4 the preface to the 44 Recognitions " ' ( 4 Diet, of Chr. 
Biog.' art. Clem. Lit.). 




-300 PETER WAS ALREADY HELD SUPREME 



31 



Dr. Bigg gives a very plausible account of the reason of the 
circulation of this literature at Rome. He thinks that Alexander 
of Apameea brought with him to Rome, 'as a new Gospel, the 
volume which had been dedicated to Elxai among the Seres of 
Parthia by an angel ninety-six miles high. The particular article 
of this revelation, on which he relied for success, was a baptism 
which washed away all, even the most hideous sins, without any 
discipline or penance at all 1 (' Horn.' xi. 26-7). Alexander arrived 
in the city of Rome during the reign of St. Callixtus (a.d. 219-222), 
in the midst of the storm about remission of sins after baptism, and 
' such an improvement on the terms of Callixtus might be expected 
to win over many of the looser Christians.' 1 

Whatever may be thought of this ingenious conjecture, it 
suggests that there are other reasons for the popularity of this 
literature more probable than that given by Dr. Lightfoot and 
others. 

But even if all these critical difficulties could be solved, one 
irrefragable proof of the untenableness of the view against which 
I have been contending would still remain. According to that 
view, the Romans wished that their see should be the See of Peter 
rather than the See of the two Apostles. It seemed to them more 
honourable ; it 4 flattered their corporate pride,' says Dr. Lightfoot. 
But why, unless St. Peter was superior to St. Paul ? The mere 
fact that St. Peter was first in order, but not in jurisdiction {primus 
inter pares), could never be a sufficient reason for dropping the 
name of St. Paul. The Romans were not Ebionites that they 
should despise St. Paul. They must, on Dr. Lightfoot's theory, 
have considered Peter, on independent grounds, head and shoulders 
above his brother Apostle, if, in less than twenty years, they could 
reverse their (supposed) former history, and claim for their see the 
name of Peter only. St. Paul tells us that ' he laboured more 
abundantly than they all ; ' how could St. Peter tower above St. 
Paul, except on the supposition that our Lord had appointed him 
to be the supreme ruler of the Church ? Our adversaries in this 
matter have to suppose the very point which they are concerned 
to deny, viz. the supremacy of Peter, in order to find a motive for 
the supposed adoption by the Romans of this Clementine literature 
as the guiding star of their local history. 



1 Studia Biblica, vol. ii. p. 189. 




CHAPTER m. 



BT. IRENJEUS, OR THE SOVEREIGNTY OP THE 
CHURCH OF ROME. 

The Epistle of St. Clement is alluded to in a remarkable 
passage in the work of St. Irenseus against heresies. He has 
just given the Church's rule of faith, which is, agreement 
with the Church of Borne, by reason of her ' more powerful 
sovereignty ' as compared with other Churches. He then 
proceeds to speak of one special instance of her exercise of 
sovereignty, viz. ' the letter of the Church in Rome to the 
Corinthians on behalf of (els) peace, 9 which letter he de- 
scribes as most adequate or powerful (Uavardrriv). He de- 
scribes it — according to one reading, the Church of Rome, 
according to another, her letter 1 — as * forcing them together 
(avfiftifid&vaa avrovs) and renewing their faith/ delivering 
'the tradition which it had recently received from the Apostles/ 
i.e. St. Peter and St. Paul. 

I. In the passage of which this is the sequel, St. Irenaeus, 
I have said, gives the Catholic rule of faith. Nothing can be 
more clear and simple. It is, ultimately, agreement with 
Rome. The deposit of the faith was delivered by our Lord to 
the Apostolic College ; and if we wish to know what that faith 
is, we have only to consult an Apostolic Church. But the easiest 
way of all is to consult the Church of Rome, because all must 
agree with, or (which comes to the same thing) have recourse 
to, that Church. She was founded by two Apostles, the most 
glorious of all, so the saint avers, and her Church is the most 
renowned and the greatest of all. She has a more powerful 
sovereignty than the rest, and by reason* of this, all other 

1 Har. lib. iii. 8, 2. 



Digitized by 



-300 



ACCORDING TO ST. IRENiEUS 



33 



Churches must have recourse to, or agree with her, so that in 
her, by union with her, the faithful everywhere have preserved 
the deposit of revealed truth. 

Such is the plain teaching of our saint, who united in 
himself such special qualifications for expressing the Church's 
rule of faith. St. Irenaeus combines the experience of East 
and West, and unites the second century with apostolic times. 
He was an Eastern and had been trained by St. Polycarp, 
who himself had sat at the feet of St. John. And he was a 
Western bishop. 

In the treatise from which the summary of his teaching, 
just given, is taken, he is engaged in pointing out the way in 
which the Christian faith may be known. Dr. Lightfoot 
observes that, in this second century, ' the episcopate is re- 
garded now not so much as the centre of ecclesiastical unity, 
but rather as the depositary of apostolic tradition.' The two 
things, however, go hand in hand. St. Irenaeus himself men- 
tions them together in specifying the effects of St. Clement's 
letter as 'compelling them to unity and renewing their faith.' 1 
It was as the guardian of the faith that the Church of Eome 
presided over the Universal Church. St. Ignatius speaks of 
her as ' presiding in the place of the region of the Eomans ' 
(an expression which indicates not the extent, but the centre 
of her presiding authority), and says that she presides ' over 
the [covenant of] love.' Dr. Lightfoot translates this 'in 
love ' instead of ' over the love,' and understands the love, not 
as the supernatural gift of the Holy Ghost, but as ' practical 
goodness,' in a word, philanthropy, instancing her great gene- 
rosity in alms. But Dr. Dollinger appears to be right in 
regarding ' the love ' as the equivalent of ' the Church.' 2 And 
it was as the guardian of the faith that the Church of Eome 
presided over the covenant of divine love. This involved her 

1 Hcbt. lib. Hi. 3. 

• ' Gleich darauf nennt er sie *poKa0iip4m rrjs &,yairij t, was nicht wie die alte 
lateinische Uebersetzung hat, prosidens in caritate heisst, sonst hatte Ignatius 
iw kyarp gesagt ; iytarfi bedeutet wie iKKki\<ria bald . . . auch die grosse auf 
Liebe gegriindete and durch Liebe zusammengehaltene Gemeinschaft aller 
GUubigen,' Ac. Cf. for the use of the genitive with wpoKa0Tjfi4prj Theodoret's 
letter to St. Leo ; he uses *poica(hui4vTi rrjs oUovfiiyrts (presiding over the world) 
of the Holy See. 



D 




34 



ROME THE NECESSARY 



a.d. 96 



being the centre of unity; for it is of the essence of the 
guardianship of the faith that those only should be admitted 
into the one teaching body, or remain in it, who hold the one 
faith, and this involves a central authority and source of 
decision. 

Now this is what also results from the famous passage of 
St. Irenaeus quoted above. The Church of Eome has a 
sovereignty, and it is connected with the preservation of the 



II. But, as Dr. Dollinger says, ' For three hundred years 
there have not been wanting writers who have endeavoured 
to wrest these words from their evident meaning/ 1 

I shall here only deal with such as have been adopted by 
writers in this country. But first, I will give the translation 
ordinarily adopted by Catholic writers, amongst whom I am 
glad to be able to number Tillemont and Bossuet. 

* It is necessary that every Church, that is, the faithful 
who are everywhere, should agree with this Church ; in which 
that tradition which is from the Apostles has been preserved 
by those who are everywhere.' 

To this rendering exception has been taken in the follow- 
ing particulars : — 

(a) It is said that St. Irenseus does not say that every 
Church must agree with the Church of Borne, but must resort 
to it, and that by every Church is meant the individuals 
amongst the faithful who find their way to the city of Borne. 8 

Now, it may be admitted that the words convenire ad may 
mean physical recourse, but it must be remembered that it is 
to the Church, not to the city of Rome that this centripetal 
movement is said to be ' of necessity.' And it is every Church 
which must resort to the Church of Borne. The following 
words — ' those who are from all sides ' — explain, but must 
not be allowed to explain away, the word Church. It is as 
organised communities, not as individual men of business, 
that every Church must resort to the Church of Borne. The 
necessity also can hardly be that which arises from the fact 
that Borne was the centre of secular life. Men who came to 

1 Oeschichte der christlichen Kirche. Landshut, 1833, B. 1, p. 355. 
« Prim. SS. p. 36. Gore's R. C. Claims, p. 97. 



faith. 




—300 



CENTRE OF UNITY 



35 



hawk their wares, or consult the market, or plead their civil 
causes, are hardly the persons likely to promote the integrity 
of the faith. Whilst such men as Hegesippus found their way 
to Borne, men like Alexander of Apamaea did the same. And, 
as a rule, it is either the wealthy, or the secular-minded, or 
the ne'er-do-wells of a community who bend their steps to 
the metropolis, and this would not contribute to the preserva- 
tion of the faith. The mere fact of a confluence of streams 
will not keep the waters sweet ; there must be some preserva- 
tive power in the centre. 

Nor is there any need to see in the word 'necessary* 
anything more than a deep-seated attraction which drew men 
to the Church of Rome on another ground. The word used 
by St. Irenaeus is the regular word in ecclesiastical Latin, as 
is the corresponding word in Greek, for such necessity. St. 
Cyril uses it as expressing the obligation under which he lay 
of writing to the Pope about Nestorius. 1 

It is, therefore, more natural to translate convenire ad as 
' agree with,' 2 and to understand necesse est of that necessity 
which arose from the commanding position of the Church of 
Rome and the supernatural operation of the Holy Ghost. But 
even if we translate convenire ad ' resort to,' it must be borne 
in mind that a necessary resort of all Churches to the Church 
of Borne implies supremacy in the latter. 

(b) To what was the commanding position of the Church 
of Bome due according to St. Irenaeus ? Our answer is, to its 
superior sovereignty, as not only an apostolic but, as in after 
times it was called, the Apostolic Church ; to its having, as St. 
Irenaeus puts it, been founded by the two most glorious Apo- 
stles, to which we must add the fact that one of those two most 
glorious Apostles was he to whom our Lord had said, ' Thou 
art Peter/ which signifies a special association with the Rock 
of Ages. 

1 Gf. infra, p. 308. And also see the letter of the Council of Ephesus to 
St. Celestine : fxpv y &**rra, c/» yvutriv rrjs <rrjs 6<ri6rfiros iwfx^yoi «ret itaptuco- 
\o\M\<t*vt(x ypdtpoptr ikyayna'tm (Labbe, t. iii. p. 1196). 

* This is Canon Bright's translation in The Roman Claims tested by An- 
tiquity, p. 8. 



d 2 




36 



BECAUSE OF HER 



a.d. 96 



Dr. Pusey and Mr. Keble understood by the word ' sove- 
reignty,' merely primitiveness or origin. They saw that the 
words must apply to the Church, and not to the city. Dr. 
Dollinger completely shattered to atoms this same translation, 
as given by Gieseler. ' Die Haretiker wiirden natiirlich einen 
Beweis fur diese absolute Nothwendigkeit einer Uebereinstim- 
mung, die bios auf den Vorzug des Alters beruhen soil, 
gefordert, sie wiirden erwiedert haben, dass jiingere Gemein- 
den allerdings von dem Glauben der altern abweichen 
konnten.' 

He scouts the idea that such an ' illogical conclusion ever 
entered the mind of St. Irenseus ; ' and he shows that the 
word * principalitas ' means in IrenaBus' writings ' supreme 
authority,' and points out that Rome was not the oldest 
Church. 1 Indeed, it may be added that St. Irenaeus ex- 
pressly calls Jerusalem the mother Church in point of an- 
tiquity ( 4 H»r.' iii. 12, 5). 

(c) But whilst understanding the ' principality ' as mean- 
ing sovereignty, others, as Mr. Puller, understand it of the 
imperial position of the city. But this is absolutely excluded 
by the context. It is the apostolic origin of any Church that 
gives it, according to St. IrenaBus, its commanding position ; 
it is the specially apostolic character of the Church of Borne 
that gives it its peculiar position amongst the apostolic 
Churches. Bossuet calls such an interpretation as that given 
by Mr. Puller 4 trifling ' with the matter ; Hefele calls it 
* ridiculous ' (lacherlich) ; Perrone, ' most absurd.' For, as 
Bossuet says, St. Irenaeus was speaking, in the previous sen- 
tence, of the Church of Borne as founded by the Apostles 
Peter and Paul, not in her imperial aspect. And the words 
' more powerful ' imply comparison with the Churches (' every 
Church ') which he has mentioned in the same breath, and 
with which he contrasts the Church of Rome as ' the most 
ancient and the most universally known.' 

(d) Some writers, as Mr. Gore and Mr. Puller, have laid 
great stress on the word translated ' everywhere.' It is lite- 
rally ' from all sides.' And they seem to imagine that this 
suggests the picture of an assemblage of the faithful from all 



1 OeschichU der christlichen Kirche, p. 357. 




—300 



ECCLESIASTICAL SUPREMACY. 



37 



quarters in the city of Rome. But it may equally represent 
the view of a writer regarding the faithful as living in all 
quarters of the globe, and connected with the centre not by 
physical movement, but by the tie of a common faith. It is, 
however, certain that the word is used by the Latin inter- 
preter, and that the corresponding word in Greek was also 
used by St. IrensBus (for in this case we have the original in 
the Bodleian MS.), for ' everywhere ' simply. St. Irenaeus 
speaks of the four Gospels as * breathing, or blowing, incor- 
ruptibility everywhere and revivifying men.' The word for 
* everywhere ' used here is the same as in the passage we 
have been considering ; 1 and it is obvious that it means a 
radiation from a centre, not vice versd. 

Further, St. Irenaeus does not say that the apostolic 
tradition was preserved through these merchants, and lawyers, 
and appellants, and heretics, and faithful, that gathered hap- 
hazard to the city of Rome, but by them — which reduces the 
supposition that he meant these business travellers at all to 
an absurdity. 

Once more, the interpretation given by Canon Bright (Joe. 
cit.) 9 viz. that the principalitas was ' a sort of " primacy," 
involving a moral guarantee of its soundness of belief, which 
led St. Irenaeus to say that every Church that was itself true 
to apostolic tradition " must needs agree with it 99 9 — implies 
the very doctrine which he is endeavouring to exclude. For 
it must be asked: If all orthodox Churches are necessarily 
found to be in agreement with the Church of Rome, what is 
this but ascribing infallibility to that Church ? This, indeed, 
is what St. Irenaeus does ascribe to Rome, an ascendency in 
matters of faith which makes her teaching the test and 
norm of the Catholic faith. And so he goes on to show that 
as a matter of fact other Churches, such as Smyrna and 
Ephesus, do agree with Rome. 2 

(e) Lastly, it has been objected that the words 'in which* 
(in qud) may refer to ' every Church/ and not to the Church 

1 Har. lib. iii. oap. 11, n. 8. Gk. vamaxMw. Lat. undique. Cf. also 
pradicationem veto Ecclcsue undique constantem (24, 1), and pradicatio veri- 
tatis ubique lucst. 

* Mr. Poller has misunderstood this passage. 




38 



IN HER WE ARE SAFE. 



a.d. 96—300 



of Borne. But this, again, necessitates the absurdity of sup- 
posing that every orthodox Church is necessarily in agree- 
ment with Borne, and yet that Borne is not infallible, or the 
equal absurdity of supposing that the chance business men 
who found their way to Borne for secular purposes kept Borne 
right in the faith — or the people, for instance, who brought 
with them the Clementine Bomance. The words in qua are 
well explained by Dr. Dollinger, as stating that the faithful 
throughout the world were « in ' the Church of Borne— that 
is, in communion with it as the centre of unity. The corre- 
sponding word in Greek would be that which is used by St. 
Paul of our being 'in Christ/ and the exact phrase of the 
Latin interpreter, whose translation is all that we have of 
this passage in St. Irenaus, is used by the African bishop, 
St. Optatus, whose work St. Augustine recommended, viz. 
1 in which one chair [i.e. the chair of Peter] unity might be 
preserved/ i.e. that in communion with this one chair, &C. 1 

The plain and simple meaning, therefore, of St. Irenaetis 
remains in possession. All Churches must agree with the 
Church of Borne, so that if you know the faith of the Church 
of Borne you know the faith of the whole Christian Church. 

1 ' D. h. in ihrem Schoosse, in der Gemeinschaft mit ihr als dem Mittel- 
punkte der Einheit ' (loc. tit. p. 358). 





CHAPTER IV. 



ST. VICTOR, OR ROME THE GUARDIAN OP ' THE COMMON 
UNITY.' 



One of the legal methods of preserving the evidence of a 
claim is to subject it, periodically, to a challenge pro formd. 
And one method of discovering how far a claim holds good, 
each as that which Borne makes, is to see what happens under 
circumstances that press heavily on the obedience of those 
over whom it is made, leading them in the natural course of 
things to dispute it. Resistance does not disprove authority ; 
while a resistance which falls short of disputing the authority 
itself indicates a sense of its lawful existence. Such an oc- 
casion occurred in the second century of the Christian era. 
A portion of the East came into collision with Rome on a 
matter on which Rome proved to be right, although the Pope 
thought it well not to press the matter beyond a certain 
point. The circumstances were as follows. 

I. In the Asiatic Churches a multitude of Jews had entered 
the Christian fold, and had kept to various Jewish customs, j 
under the eye and apparently with the sanction of the J 
Apostle St. John. Amongst these customs was that of cele- 
brating the Paschal Feast on the same day as their uncon- 
verted brethren. In the West it was observed on the Sunday 
after the 14th Nisan — always on a Sunday. Amongst those 
who now observed the feast on the same day as the Jews 
were some whose belief as to the idea of the feast was the 
same as that of the rest of the Christian world. But there 
were also some whose teaching as to the idea of the festival 
itself was erroneous, and whose observance of it differed 
altogether from that of the Church. 1 In fact, the observance 

1 * Many of the orthodox Quartodecimans thought that the main feature of 
the Paschal Feast lay in the commemoration of the death of Christ, of whom 




40 



TIIE DISPUTE ABOUT EASTER. 



a.d. 96 



of this Queen of Festivals, on which St. John the Apostle ap- 
pears to have allowed some external difference, had come to 
be connected with Ebionitish teaching. It would therefore 
only be a matter of time for an endeavour to be made to 
bring the whole Christian world into unison on such an im- 
portant matter, for though it was not a matter of faith, it was 
closely connected with the faith. 

Rome had her observance handed down from the Apostles 
Peter and Paul ; and her observance was destined to be the 
rule of action for the entire Church. In the beginning of the 
century she had made an endeavour to achieve a greater 
uniformity, but had ended with acquiescing in the continuance 
of the dissimilarity of practice. Anicetus received Polycarp 
to communion at Rome, although Polycarp adopted the Asiatic 
mode of observing the Feast. Soter went a step further and 
insisted on uniformity, at least in Rome itself. 

II. But when Victor ascended the throne matters had 
become much more serious, and the Asiatic observance of 
Easter was adopted by certain schismatics, who were also 
infected with Montanism. 1 It became a matter of moment 
to stop the dissimilarity of observance in the Church itself, or 
to dissociate it from false teaching. St. Victor decided upon 
the first, but succeeded only in effecting the second. 

Mosheim, the German Protestant historian, has said that 
the action of Victor in this matter, and the reception with 
which it met, prove that in that age the power of the Roman 
Pontiff was not such as that he could cut off from the whole 
Church those of whose opinions and practices he disapproved. 
He has been followed in this by the author of 1 The Primitive 
Saints and the See of Rome,' 2 who contends that the account 
of the matter in Eusebius shows that the loss of communion 
with Rome did not involve loss of communion with the rest of 
the Church. There is a sense in which this is true, but it is 
not the sense in which this writer uses the expression. There 
was, in early times, a measure of separation from Rome which 
was not intended to involve separation from the whole body. 

the Paschal Lamb was the type.' Cf. Jungmann, Diss. ii. 65, who gives a short 
account of worse heresies into which some of the Quartodeoimans were falling. 
1 Cf. Jungmann, Diss. ii. 79. * Pp. 24-31. 





—300 



ST. VICTOR'S ENDEAVOUR 



41 



This lesser separation was a serious loss, but was meant to 
fall short, by a great deal, of the excommunication under 
anathema. 1 For the latter a distinct and formal notification 
of its terrible infliction was necessary. Moreover, this latter 
and more extreme measure might be preceded by the former. 
With these remarks I will proceed to narrate what actually 
happened, and to show that matters never came to the point 
which would necessitate our speaking of these Asiatics as 
being under anathema, and so in actual schism. 

St. Victor first collected the evidence of the whole Christian 
world,* except Asia, and then requested Polycrates, the Bishop 
of Ephesus, to summon the Asiatic bishops in council, in the 
hope of inducing them to relinquish their purely local practice. 
Polycrates obeyed. The Asiatic Churches, however, came to 
the conclusion that they would adhere to their own custom. 
Polycrates, their leader, went so far in the way of exaggeration 
as to speak of their own practice as though it alone were 1 in 
accordance with the Gospel,' and they pleaded the authority 
of St. John the Evangelist and St. Philip. They may have 
meant only that their custom had been permitted by the 
Apostle. Anyhow, if they dreamt of an Apostolic prescription, 
we are not obliged to think that they were historically correct 
in their assertion. 

The result of their answer to St. Victor was that he decided 
upon strong measures. The warmth with which they de- 
fended their custom must have seemed to him suspicious, as 
though they were erecting it into a matter of belief, or were 
really in danger of doctrinal error. For it must be carefully 
remembered, that the question of the Paschal observance in- 
volved not merely that of a day, but in many cases (known 
only too unhappily to the Pope) of the meaning of the feast. 

St. Victor, therefore, decided, or at least threatened, to ex- 
communicate the Asiatic Churches 4 from the common unity,' 3 
as Eusebius expresses it. He set to work to do it ; he made 
the endeavour ; he took the first step. 4 He issued his notice of 

1 Cf. D6l linger' s Geschichte, Periode II. ad finem ; and quotations from De 
Smedt in Jungmann, Diss. ii. 76. 

* Euseb. Hist. Eccl. v. 23. 9 rrjs Koirijs i*6if\ros. 

4 vtipSroi. Euseb. in loco. The word involves no more than the endeavour 
which the head-master of a school might make to enforce a salutary rule, but 




42 



FOR UNITY FAILED. 



a.d. 96 



excommunication, of downright excommunication, to the effect 
that they were cut off from the common unity (a/coi vavyrovs). 
Unfortunately we do not possess St. Victor's letter; conse- 
quently it is impossible to say whether or no the excommunica- 
tion was contingent on their obedience at the next Easter. 1 But 
it is most reasonable, and most in harmony with what we know 
of such excommunications in after times, as, for instance, St. 
Celestine's excommunication of Nestorius — to suppose that these 
Asiatics were to be excommunicate if they adhered to their 
custom at the following Easter. But as soon as they received 
the Papal injunction, or, at any rate, before the time came for 
compliance with it, i.e. before the followingEaster, some bishops 
protested. 2 Their protest, however, consisted only of exhorta- 
tion or entreaty : i they exhorted,' says Eusebius. This they 
did in no measured terms, but went beyond the limits of the 
respect due to the office of St. Victor. 3 Their complaints were 
probably a more bitter edition of Polycrates' previous letter, 
in which that bishop pleads his own virgin life as a reason 
why he should be heard, and says he cares for no threats — 
not a very edifying form of correspondence. 

III. Peace, however, came from the mediation of the same 
saint, who wrote that ' it is necessary for every Church to agree 
with the Church of Borne, because of her more powerful princi- 
pality or supremacy.' St. Irena&us (the author of the words) 
wrote from Gaul a letter couched in more deferential terms. 4 He 

from which he might desist owing to the fear of rebellion. Mr. Puller greatly 
exaggerates its force (Prim. S. S. p. 30). 
1 So D5llinger, Geschiehte, p. 289. 

* * The sentence did not please all the bishops ' are the words of Eusebius, 
which implies that there were some, probably many, who thought St. Victor in 
the right. 

s irAijicTiic^Tepor. Mr. Puller has translated this • very severely.' But 
v\iiktik6s implies bitterness—* objurgatione acri ' is Dindorf 's translation of the 
positive. 1 Severely ' is a word which suggests the tone of a superior rebuking 
the fault of an inferior, or of a usurper. ' Bitterly ' (the correct translation) 
is a word which describes the tone of a dissatisfied inferior protesting against 
his superior's action. And * very severely * misses the point of the ending of 
the word. It is not vKyiKrucunaror y but is in the comparative degree, implying 
excess, 4 more than the occasion warranted ' in the judgment of Eusebius. 

4 wpo<rri*6rrw$. This seems to be in contrast with the *\nKrtK&T9pov or 
excessive bitterness of the Asiatics. He was amongst the number of those 
who were displeased with Victor's determination, but differed from them in tone. 



Digitized by 



Google 



—300 HIS AUTHORITY ACKNOWLEDGED, 43 



agreed with Rome about the observation of Easter, but real- 
ised the impossibility of bringing the Asiatics into line under 
present circumstances. Possibly also he did not realise as keenly 
as St. Victor did the mischievous tendency, under present 
circumstances, of the Asiatic 1 custom, which gave it a very 
different colour from the same custom in the time of his 
predecessors. He pleaded, as he had a right to do, that it 
was not in itself a matter of faith, which, of course, St. Victor 
himself allowed. And he ' warned ' St. Victor of the con- 
sequences of persisting in his threat, or sentence. 2 The Asiatic 
blood was up, and a schism was possible. He referred to the 
precedents set by Pius the First, Hyginus, Telesphorus, and 
Xystus, as not having 4 cast off any merely for the sake of a 
form/ showing what he thought of the power possessed by the 
Bishops of Rome. He therefore advised 3 St. Victor with all 
becoming respect (irpoo-rftcovrtos) 'not to cut off whole 
Churches.' The Churches, therefore, were not, to the mind of 
St. Irenaeus, as yet excommunicated ; but it was, according to 
the same saint, within the power of St. Victor to cut them off. 
Bossuet exactly hits the point when he paraphrases St. Irenaeus' 
advice as being to the effect 'that a rigorous right is not 
always to be used.' Not a hint is given all round that any one 
of the Churches disputed St. Victor's authority. Had any other 
portion of the Church talked of cutting off whole Churches from 
the common unity, it would only have made itself ridiculous. 
But when the threat comes from Borne the whole Church is 
astir ; and there is one thing that no one says — neither St. 
Irenaeus nor the rest of the bishops said, 4 It is ridiculous, 
you have no such authority ; ' but they exhort, and protest, and 
warn, and entreat him not to do so. 

1 It most be remembered that Eusebius in speaking of Asia means, not the 
peninsula, but Asia in the restricted sense customary at that time. Cf. De 
Smedt, Diss. ii. cap. 1, note 1. 

* I have put the alternative, because I do not think it possible to determine 
for certain which it was. Eusebius' account, not containing St. Victor's 
letters, is not sufficient to enable us to decide. Catholic writers are to be found 
on both sides. It seems to me that the evidence, on the whole, is in favour of 
a threat only. 

■ wapcuv*i = recommend. We have hardly an exact English equivalent for 
the word in the original — ' admonish ' has with us more idea of superiority, 
and 4 advise,' perhaps, a shade more of softness than the original. 



Digitized by 



44 



BUT RESISTED. 



a.d. 96 



St. Victor's endeavour failed ; for he found the opposition 
to this exercise of discipline too serious. It was a bold attempt 
to effect the more perfect unity of the Church, and to prevent 
the intrusion of heretical tendencies. He had thought to 
enforce, under pain of excommunication, a more uniform 
observance of the Festival of the Resurrection throughout the 
Church. The endeavour unfortunately failed, owing to the 
passionate tenacity with which he found the Asiatics wrongly 
adhered to their national custom. He found he could not 
persist in downright excommunication, even of the lesser kind, 
with any hopes of gaining the end in view. It was not a 
matter of faith, and therefore, whilst he showed his care for 
the unity of the Church and his jealousy for the faith — not 
directly assaulted, but indirectly endangered by a line of 
action which easily lent itself to error — he showed his wisdom 
in ceasing to contend for his point when he saw the spirit 
of obstinate partisanship which his endeavour evoked. He 
desisted from the final step, in accordance with the respect- 
ful remonstrance of St. IrenaBus. Eventually the Universal 
Church settled down to the Roman mode of observance. 
The whole incident discovers the actual centre of Church life 
in that century. St. Victor sets in motion synodical action 
throughout the Church, gathers up the results which are sent 
in to him, lays down the conditions of adherence to the 
common unity, and his ruling ultimately prevailed throughout 
the Church, as it does to this day, concerning the observance 
of the Queen of Festivals. 

Note. — Mr. Puller contends that St. Victor cut off these 
Churches of Asia from communion with Rome, and endeavoured to 
go further, i.e. endeavoured to cut them off from 'the common 
unity/ but that in this he failed. From which he argues that no degree 
of loss of communion with Rome involves loss of communion with 
the rest of the Church. 

It is to be noted that he appears to understand okoivwvy[tov<;, 

* separated from communion/ as meaning separated from the local 
Church of Rome, and not 4 from the common unity,' as the context 
in Eusebius suggests. And indeed he goes so far as to state that 

* Eusebius tells us that, while Victor, speaking for his own Churchy 
announced/ &c. ; whereas Eusebius merely says that Victor an- 




—300 



MR. PULLER ON ST. VICTOR. 



45 



nounced, &c. And to clench the matter, in summing up he inverts 
the order of Eusebius' words, and so draws his conclusion from them. 
He puts the proclamation of St. Victor (to the effect that those 
Churches were excommunicated) first, and the endeavour to cut 
them off from the common unity last. 1 This is not the order in 
Eusebius. The endeavour was being made, and the first step was 
to issue the proclamation. So that unless they repented and altered 
their rule of observance at the following Easter, they incurred the 
downright excommunication (fybrpr). The next step was not what 
Mr. Puller states it to have been. He says, 'The other bishops 
objected to Victor's proceeding ; they refused to withdraw their com- 
munion from Polycrates. 1 This latter sentence is not contained in 
Eusebius' account. What the bishops did was not to « refuse,' but to 
exhort, and to reproach with some bitterness. And since their 
exhortations, enforced by St. Irenseus' letter of more becoming tone, 
availed with St. Victor, matters never came to the point of refusal 
on the part of the bishops. The breach no sooner opened than it 
closed. So that the moral to be drawn from this incident in the 
early life of the Church is something very different from what Mr. 
Puller describes it. He says (p. 81— the italics are my own), ' The 
right way of dealing with such claims,' i.e. those of the Vatican 
Council, 1 if we may judge by the example of St. Irenaaus and other 
holy bishops 8 of his time, is to inveigh against the claimant strongly 
and to upbraid him severely, and to refuse to give in to his claims. 9 
On the contrary, if we take the few facts we possess, there would be 
'exhortation' to desist, there would not be the same upbraiding, 
for that was too bitter (irXi7#crt#cwrcpov), there would be ' becoming 9 
(irpooTjrivTu*) admonition as to a too dangerous exercise of 
rightful authority, but there would not be (if we are to judge by 
Eusebius' account of the whole matter) any denial of the authority 
itself. Professor Harnack, the most brilliant German Protestant 
writer of the day, says that Victor 1 ventured by an edict ... to 
declare that any Church which did not adopt the Roman method was 
excluded as heretical from the communion of the one Church. How 
could Victor have ventured on such an edict ... if it was not 
already established and recognised that it belonged to the Roman 
Church, as its distinctive prerogative, to determine the conditions of 



* The bishops who agree with Mr. Puller seem always to be holy. He denies 
the title of saint to Victor, just as he does to St. Stephen, St. Damasus, St. 
Oelasios, St. Celestine, St. Zosimus. These holy men were all Popes. In the 
same way Dnpin and Tillemont are Roman Catholic divines, the Ballerini and 
others are only * Ultramontane.' 



1 P. 80. 




46 



MR. PULLER ON ST. VICTOR. 



a.d. 96 -300 



the koiv^ &a><ri9, when essential doctrines of the faith were in 
question ? ' (' Dogmengeschichte,' i. p. 868.) 

In the coarse of his description of this incident Mr. Puller also 
settles a question of translation without sufficient authority. St. 
Victor * requested ' Polycrates to summon the bishops in his parts, 
and Polycrates did so. Mr. Puller finds in this an argument against 
the supremacy of the Holy See. He considers the Greek word to 
imply equality. But the word used by Polycrates is equally appli- 
cable to the request of a superior, as may be seen by consulting 
Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon, 7th edition. It would, indeed, 
be hypercriticism to the last degree to lay stress upon such an ex- 
pression at all, for who does not know that superiors will often, out 
of courtesy, express their desires, as Popes usually do now, instead 
of issuing a peremptory demand ? But in point of fact d£ioo> by 
itself implies neither superiority nor equality on the part of the 
person who makes the request. That must be detennined by other 
considerations. 

Once more. There is no authority for saying, as Mr. Puller 
does, that ' everything went on as if nothing had happened.' The 
obstinacy of these Asiatics had received a check, and it seems not 
improbable that some further measure of conformity to the Roman 
mode of observing the Paschal Feast followed upon the stand made 
by St. Victor ; if we may trust the letter of Constantino, respecting 
the Nicene Council, it would certainly seem as if this incident had 
had an effect for good. 

With regard to the question as to whether St. Victor actually 
excommunicated the Asiatics contingent upon their obedience by the 
following Easter, or only threatened to do so, it seems to me that 
Firmilian's evidence is very strong. He says in reference to the day 
of celebrating the Paschal Feast, that ' there was not at any time a 
departure from the peace and unity of the Catholic Church on that 
account. 1 (' Ep. Cypr.' lxxv.) Tillemont makes a poor attempt to 
get out of the plain meaning of this sentence. And Firmilian's 
position in Asia Minor makes him a specially valuable witness in 
this matter. It is true that I have given reasons for questioning his 
evidence in the rest of the sentence, but they do not apply to this 
point. Firmilian's argument is that St. Stephen, in excommuni- 
cating (so he asserted) the Bishop of Carthage on such a question as 
that of baptism by heretics, was acting contrary to St. Victor and 
others on the question of Easter. 



ft 




CHAPTER V. 



THE DOCTRINE OF ST, CYPRIAN ON UNITY. 



The teaching of St. Cyprian, and certain portions of his life, 
have been claimed as the special justification of the Anglican 
position in early history. Dr. Pusey, in his preface to the 
Epistles of this saint, says, * The Epistles of St. Cyprian are 
the more deeply interesting to us in that he, who has been 
called "the ideal of a Christian bishop," has been almost 
involuntarily chosen as the model of our Church.' He con- 
siders that St. Cyprian 'maintained in act the abstract 
independence of Churches, which he had in theory main- 
tained.' 1 Mr. Puller, in his book on * The Primitive Saints 
and the See of Borne,' maintains that ' both his writings and 
the story of his life remain as a perpetual witness against 
the Papal and in favour of the episcopal constitution of the 
Church of God,' 2 and even goes to the length of saying, in 
another place, 3 ' The defenders of the English Church may 
safely stake their case, so far as it relates to the Papal claims, 
on the witness borne by St. Cyprian.' It is necessary, there- 
fore, to enter more fully into the teaching and life of this 
saint than would be otherwise natural, premising that to stake 
the defence of one's ecclesiastical position on a single saint is 
contrary to all Catholic ideas of divine faith in the Church. 

I. It will be admitted on all hands that St. Cyprian's eye 
is perpetually fixed on one saying of our Lord's when he 
thinks of the government of the Church. ' Thou art Peter ; 
and on this rock I will build my Church . . . and to thee 
will I give the keys of the kingdom of Heaven,' are to 

• IAb. of the Fathers. St. Cyprian, pref . p. xvii. [N.B. The references to 
St. Cyprian's writings are to the Oxford edition ; but where the number of an 
Epistle differs from that in the Benedictine edition, I have referred to the 
latter thus, B.x.] 

■ P. 357. * P. 363. 




48 



'THE CHURCH BUILT ON PETER ' a.d." 96 



St. Cyprian the all-important words in regard to Church 
authority. 1 At the same time, it is undoubtedly the case 
that St. Cyprian is full of the necessity of obedience to the 
bishop of the diocese, and that he distinctly speaks of the 
Church having been ' settled on the bishops.' 2 

The point, therefore, to be considered is the connection 
between the episcopate of the Church and the Apostle St. 
Peter — whether, according to St. Cyprian, it excludes the 
sovereignty of the Bishop of Rome. 

Some of the most brilliant German Protestant writers, 
such as Neander and Harnack, and, amongst Americans, 
Schaff, maintain that St. Cyprian's teaching necessarily issued 
in the Papal form of government. Amongst Anglican writers, 
some agree with these German historians, whilst others, such 
as Dr. Pusey and his followers, hold that St. Cyprian main- 
tained the necessity of the episcopate, and, at the same time, 
its entire independence of the See of Peter. The former hold 
that if the episcopate be considered as a matter of necessity, 
by reason of its relationship to Peter, its dependence on the 
successor of Peter (if there be such) necessarily follows ; the 
latter, that if all bishops are the successors of Peter, there 
is no room for a special relationship to the Apostle on the 
part of any one see. 

The position maintained in the following pages is that the 
Papal supremacy is already there. St. Cyprian regards the 
saying of our Lord to Peter as the root of all authority in 
the Church. Other Apostles were associated with Peter ; but 
St. Cyprian separates him off from the rest, as well by the 
stress which he lays on the commission given to him (com- 
pared with the very rare occasions on which he mentions the 
rest), as by the definite expression so often repeated in his 
writings, that the Church was founded by Christ on Peter. 
It is to our Lord's saying to Peter that St. Cyprian per- 
petually recurs, which he regards also as giving the form of 
unity to His Church subsequently to the death of that Apostle 
(Ep. lv. 6, lix. 18). St. Peter was, in the teaching of Cyprian, 
the beginning of a divine institution, which issued in a stream 

1 Cf. Ep. xxxiii. 1, lxvi. 7, Ixxiii. 7, lix. 8, lxx. 5, Ixxi. 2, lxxiii. 7. Tr. on 
Unity, § 3. * Ep. xzxiii. B. xxyii. 




—300 IS THE REFRAIN OF CYPRIAN. 



49 



of bishops throughout the world. The Apostles founded 
various communities of Christians, each with their head to 
succeed themselves ; but the authority of all is traced, in the 
Cyprianic literature, to the words of Christ to Peter, repeated 
in part, and in part only, to the rest of the Apostles. 

Thus the bishops were the successors of the Apostles, but 
of the Apostles considered as a college, with Peter at their 
head. On Peter the Church was founded : it was founded, too, 
on the Apostles, but on these only, I must repeat, as forming a 
body of which Peter was the head; and the Church is for 
ever founded on the bishops, because the episcopate has suc- 
ceeded to the rule of Peter, 1 having come into being through 
the missionary initiative of the several Apostles, scattered 
throughout the globe, who were all of them associated with 
Peter. 

So that when St. Cyprian says that the origin of heresy 
and schism lies in the misfortune that 'the head is not 
sought/ 2 it is not our Lord simply, but our Lord considered 
as the Creator of an institution, whom he contemplates. In 
fact when he says * the head is not sought/ he may be said to 
mean broadly that the original institution is overlooked, the 
originating words of our Lord, who is our Divine Head, are 
not borne in mind. 8 By these words an authority was placed 
on earth ; for the saint goes on to speak of Peter having re- 
ceived the keys. And this he insists upon by way of showing 
that the martyrs and confessors in their prisons were dis- 
turbing the unity of the Church, in overlooking the bishop 
of the diocese, who derived an authority from our Lord's 

1 Ep. xxxiii. St. Francis o! Sales explains the different ways in which St. 
Peter and the rest of the Apostles were foundations. ' They were foundations 
of the Church equally with him [Peter] as to the conversion of souls and as to 
doctrine ; but as to the authority of governing they were so unequally, as St. 
Peter was the ordinary head, not only of the rest of the whole Church, but of 
the Apostles also ' (The Catholic Controversy, by St. Francis of Sales. Burns 
and Oates, 1886, p. 249). 

* De Unit. Eccl. § 3. 

* Elsewhere he says that the remedy, 4 when truth is in jeopardy, is to recur 
to the evangelical fountain, and the apostolical tradition, that the rule of our 
action may come thence whence both our order and origin have taken their rise.' 
And again, • If we revert to the head or origin of the divine tradition, human 
error ceases 1 (Ep. ad Pompeium). 



B 




50 



HIS TREATISE ON UNITY 



a.d. 96 



words to Peter which did not belong to them, as they suffered, 
or awaited their crown. And, again, the Novatianists, of 
course to a much greater extent and in connection, not with 
great truths, as was the case with the confessors, but with great 
iniquity, were overlooking the head, who in that case was the 
legitimate Bishop of Kome, who, as legitimately rooted in the 
past, was himself, and not Novatian, the head and root of the 
Church. 1 

II. For St. Cyprian wrote his treatise on Unity to meet 
the necessities of the day, and the form which it took was 
determined by those present needs. It is, therefore, neces- 
sary to enter upon these somewhat at length, if we are to 
understand why St. Cyprian laid such stress on obedience to 
bishops. 2 

(a) The early part of his episcopate was occupied with the 
danger which had arisen to the discipline of the Church from 
an unintentional encroachment on the bishop's office on the 
part of the confessors and martyrs in the Decian persecution. 
The occasion of this encroachment was as follows. The 
Church taught that, owing to the solidarity of the Body of 
Christ, the suffering of one part availed to diminish the punish- 
ment of another. During the persecution many Christians 
had failed to confess the faith, and had incurred the ban of 
the Church. The question arose as to how and when they 
should be restored after their lapse. It was the custom to 
have recourse to the martyrs and confessors in their prisons, 
and to obtain from them a certificate to the effect that they 
desired for the applicants a release from the punishment due 

1 ' For this has been the very source whence heresies and schisms have 
taken their rise, that obedience is not paid to the Priest of God/ i.e. (as gene- 
rally in St. Cyprian's writings) the bishop (Ep. lix. 6, B. lv.). 

* 1 For schisms and heresies have arisen, and do arise, from the bishop, who 
is one and presides over the Church, being despised by the proud presumption 
ol some * (Ep. lxvi. 4, B. lxix.). 

1 It is the consideration of these circumstances that gives the true answer 
to Mr. Puller's objection in his Prim. SS. and the See of Borne, p. 351. He 
says, 4 You may read the whole treatise on unity from beginning to end, and 
you will not find one single word about Kome, or about the Pope, or about 
any Papal jurisdiction derived from St. Peter/ The treatise was written (so 
St. Cyprian tells us himself, Ep. liv. B. li.) to meet special needs, and, as wiU 
be seen, Papal authority did not come into question. 




—300 WRITTEN FOR PRESENT NEEDS. 



51 



to their sin of apostasy. This, in the proper course of things, 
was presented to the bishop, who decided upon the extent to 
which the combined effect of the martyrs' prayers and the 
penitence of the lapsed should affect the latter. The appli- 
cability of the sufferings of the confessors to those who sought 
their intercession was admitted on all sides ; and the right of 
the bishop to grant an indulgence, or remission of the tem- 
poral punishment due to the sin of apostasy, was unques- 
tioned. But it lay with the bishop to decide in each particular 
case; for the temporal punishment could only properly be 
remitted to those who gave signs of contrition for the sin they 
had committed ; and it also rested with the bishop to deter- 
mine the extent to which the martyrs' certificates should be 
available to shorten or dispense with the natural term of 
penance. In a word, the present teaching of the Church on 
the subject of indulgences 1 was in full vogue ; only the con- 
fessors had been led to give their certificates without due re- 
ference to the bishop. 

Now St. Cyprian felt that the whole discipline of the Church 
was at stake, through the imprudence of these imprisoned 
confessors, in giving certificates irrespective of the applicants' 
penitence and without proper authorisation from the bishop. 
He accordingly wrote to certain persons on the subject, and 
sent all his letters to Borne for the inspection of the clergy 
there. 

Borne was just then without a bishop. It had been* part 
of the plan of the persecution under Decius to weaken the 
body by depriving it of its head. ' He . . . persecutes the 
rulers of the Church that, its pilot being removed, he may 
.... make shipwreck of the Church.* Accordingly St. 
Cyprian had been compelled to flee into retirement, and the 
Bishop of Borne had been martyred, for there, St. Cyprian 
says, Decius would rather have seen a rival emperor than a 
bishop of God. Accordingly the election of a new bishop in 
the place of Fabian, which St. Cyprian calls ' the place of 

1 An indulgence is a discharge of the debt of temporal punishment due to 
forgiven gin, obtained by the application of the treasury of the Church, as 
Tertollian called the merits of the martyrs. Of coarse the merit of our Lord 
is the source of all other merits. 



b 2 




52 



THE BISHOP'S OFFICE 



A.D. 96 



Peter,* was rendered impossible for nearly two years. But 
the local Church of Home was still at the head of the Chris- 
tian world. Although her clergy could not act with the 
authority of the Eoman Bishop, they were still the object of 
special deference and respect. The aroma of infallibility 
lingered in the vacant see. The Boman clergy had already 
written to Cyprian in regard to his flight from persecution, in 
consequence of some unfavourable comments that had been 
made, probably by those who were preparing the way for a 
schism. St. Cyprian, in no way resenting this intervention 
of the Boman clergy, first wrote to know if the letter was 
really theirs, and then, on finding that it was, defended his 
conduct. ' I have thought it necessary to write this letter to 
you, wherein an account might be given you of my acts, dis- 
cipline, and diligence .... What I have done my epistles 
will tell you, which I sent, as occasion required, to the number 
of thirteen, and which I have transmitted to you.' 1 No one, 
surely, will suppose that the Boman clergy ever dreamt of 
sending an account of tlieir 1 acts, discipline, and diligence 9 
to Carthage. 

St. Cyprian then proceeds to detail his proposed method of 
dealing with those who had lapsed under persecution. In this 
portion of his letter he shows still more strongly what deference 
he felt to be due to the chair of Peter in Borne, even when 
the administration of the Church there was in the hands of 
the inferior clergy. 1 Nor in this 9 (i.e. his attitude towards 
the lapsed) 4 did I lay down a law, or rashly make myself 
its author. But whereas it seemed right that both honour 
should be shown to the martyrs, and yet the violence of those 
who desired to throw everything into confusion be checked — 
and, moreover, having read your letter lately sent to my clergy 
through Crementius, the archdeacon, to the effect that those 
should be helped who, having lapsed, were seized with sickness, 
and who, repenting, desired communion — I thought it right 
to abide by what was your opinion also, lest our conduct in 
the ministry, which ought to be united and to agree in all 
things, should in any respect differ.' He then speaks of 
referring matters to a council at Carthage after the peace, that 



1 Ep. xx. B. xiv. 




r 



—300 



WAS BEING INVADED 



53 



we ' may with the assistance of your counsel also set in order 
and restore everything.' He speaks elsewhere (Ep. xxvii.) of 
the letter of the Roman clergy having helped him much; 
whilst the Roman clergy, careful not to assume the prerogatives 
of their bishop, say that Cyprian ' wished us to be found not 
so much judges as pastors in counsels.' At the same time 
they speak of the inerrancy of the Church of Rome, its faith 
having been celebrated throughout the world — a fact which 
(they say) the Apostle would not have mentioned ' unless this 
vigorousness had derived its root of faith from that time and 
thenceforward*. 9 But they are the more compelled to wait 
before giving any definitive judgment as to the lapsed, 1 be- 
cause since the decease of Fabian, of most honoured memory, 
on account of the difficulties of circumstances and the times, 
we have no bishop yet appointed who should settle all these 
matters, and who might, with authority and counsel, take 
account of those who have lapsed.' He also mentions later on 
that this epistle of the Roman clergy 1 was sent throughout 
the world, and made known to all the Churches and all the 
brethren.' 1 

The Roman clergy then, whilst waiting for a bishop to be 
appointed, who could settle matters 1 with authority ' as well 
as ' counsel,' meanwhile applauded St. Cyprian's intention of 
refusing to devolve the work of the bishop in the restoration 
of the lapsed on the confessors and martyrs. Their certi- 
ficates were to be allowed their due weight ; their sufferings 
were to be admitted in lieu of the temporal punishment 
which those who obtained the certificate would have been 
bound to undergo ; but the whole matter was to be submitted 
in each diocese to the ' head ' of the Christian people therein. 

1 Ep, lv. 3. It is difficult to understand how any one could twist this inci- 
dent, naturally suggestive of the authoritative position of Borne, into an instance 
of dissimilarity between the 1 Cyprianic * and the ' modern Roman ' theory of 
the Church's government. It has, however, been said (Prim. 88, p. 60) that 
on the latter theory * there would probably be some reference to the fact that 
a pope would soon be elected who would be able to ratify what the archbishop 
had done.' This is exactly what the Roman clergy did say to Cyprian in regard 
to the archdeacon's action during the vacancy of the see. Mr. Puller most un- 
justifiably substitutes the 1 judgment 1 of the archbishop for 4 their conscience ' 
in that note. No 1 surprise ' is expressed. 




64 



BY THE MAHTYRS* CERTIFICATES, 



a.d. 96 



The danger that was threatening them was, according to St. 
Cyprian, that of disregarding the divinely appointed head. 
And he finds the divine institution of a head in oar Lord's 
words to St. Peter. He writes to the lapsed (Ep. xxxiii.), say- 
ing that ' Our Lord, whose precepts and warnings we ought to 
observe, determining the honour of a bishop and the ordering 1 
of his own Church, speaks in the Gospel and says to Peter, " I 
say unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this rock," &c. 
Thence the ordination of bishops and the ordering of the Church 
runs down along the course of time and the line of succession, 
so that the Church is settled upon her bishops, and every act of 
the Church is regulated by the same prelates. Since, then, 
this is founded on divine law, I marvel that some have had 
the bold sincerity to write to me as if they were addressing 
letters in the name of the Church, whereas the Church con- 
sisted of the bishop and clergy and all who stand.' 

St. Cyprian, therefore, distinctly understands the 1 rock,' 
in St. Matthew xvi., to be St. Peter ; and the bishops enter into 
their share of the keys through succession from Peter, who is 
thus, in a very true sense, the ' root ' of the Catholic Church 
and the source of its unity. She is ' built on Peter, for an 
origin and for the ordering* of unity.' The rock which, 
according to St. Cyprian, is Peter, has expanded itself in ' a 
line of succession,' and the Church consists of those bishops 
who flow from Peter, together with the clergy and the faithful. 
Included amongst those bishops is, of course, according to 
St. Cyprian (however mistaken he may be in the judgment 
of Mr. Puller 8 ) the occupant of the chair of Peter. The bishop 
is the head of the Church in each diocese, because he is part 
of the stream which has flowed from Peter ; and this stream 
is, all along its course, invested with divine right because its 
source is of divine institution, coming from the creative words 
of the Heavenly Master, ' Thou art Peter,' &c. 

So far St. Cyprian's teaching, though not couched in the 
terms of modern theology, is yet in substance identical with 
that of the Eoman Catholic Church at this hour. In the 



1 Ratio. Oxford translation. 

* Rations. The same word in the letter just quoted. 

• Prim. SS. p. 54. * 




-800 



AND AT ROME, AN ANTI-POPE 



55 



district of Westminster, for instance, the 1 head ' must be sought 
(caput quaritur), and the 'head* is the bishop who comes 
down from Peter, and so is part of that enduring living 
foundation on which Christ built His Church, and on which it 
will remain until the end of the world. St. Peter is not, 
according to St. Cyprian, as some would make him, only a 
symbol, but he is the origin of the Church's unity, and com- 
munion with Peter is an essential feature of the Church's 
life. Consequently, the lapsed must know that their restora- 
tion to the Church is to be regulated by the bishop, not 
simply by certificates from the martyrs. And the Bishop of 
Carthage would not lay down a law on the rules to guide the 
bishop's action without consulting Borne. 

(b) But another event in the life of St. Cyprian turned 
his thoughts towards the subject of unity, and led to a further 
explanation of its origin and nature. An Anti-Pope arose at 
Rome, and St. Cyprian flew to the aid of Cornelius, the 
legitimate Pope. In an important passage he insists upon the 
regularity of Cornelius's appointment, and the consequent sin 
of opposing him. There cannot be two bishops over the same 
see, and those who through their own fault are in communion 
with the wrong one are outside the supernatural sphere of 
the Church, and their very martyrdom would lose its merit. 
There was, says St. Cyprian, already a properly appointed 
bishop when Novatian was ordained, and consequently the 
Novatianists were in schism. It was not a question of what 
were the powers or rights of the See of Rome ; St. Cyprian 
had no call to dwell on these. The question was as to the 
rightful occupant of that see. And St. Cyprian determines 
this question by insisting on the unity of the Church — its 
necessarily visible unity. Cornelius was the Bishop of Rome, 
received as such by the brotherhood of bishops. He was 
appointed, says St. Cyprian, * when the place of Peter and the 
rank of the sacerdotal chair was vacant ' — i.e. not merely the 
bishopric but the ' place of Peter ' (Ep. lix. B. lv.) ; therefore no 
other could, by any possibility, be the bishop of that same 
city. The Church cannot be visibly two or three. It began 
with one, it was founded on one by the voice of the Lord, and 
it must continue one. It cannot be, like the kingdoms of 




56 



INVADED THE SEE. 



A.D. 96 



Israel and Judah and the garment of Ahijah, visibly dis- 
united. This, he says, 'has been the very source whence 
heresies and schisms have taken their rise, that obedience is 
not paid to the Priest of God [i.e. the bishop] ; nor do they 
reflect that there is for the time one high priest in the Church 
and one judge for the time in Christ's stead, whom, if the 
whole brotherhood would obey according to the divine injunc- 
tions, no one would stir in anything against the College of 
Prelates: no one after the divine sanction had, after the 
suffrages of the people, after the consent of our fellow-bishop, 
would make himself a judge, not of his bishop, but of God ; 
no one would by a rent of unity tear asunder the Church of 



It is not difficult from a passage like this to see what 
St. Cyprian would have thought of ordaining an archbishop 
to a see, whilst the bishops of the province were in prison, in 
protest against the authority (which they believed to have no 
'divine sanction') under which the said archbishop was 
ordained, whilst the rest of the Church were not consulted or 
communicated with. In other words, the present Archbishop 
of Canterbury has no means of tracing himself to Peter, 
according to Cyprianic tests, and can therefore have no share 
in the keys of Peter. For St. Cyprian was led to lay stress on 
the obedience due to the bishop in each diocese, not because 
he viewed the bishop as standing alone and deriving his com- 
mission from our Lord in such a way that he could act 
independently of the rest of the Church, but as one of a 
compact brotherhood visibly united. 2 And whilst he had an 
office to fulfil, which he could devolve on no one else, and for 
which he was ultimately responsible to our Lord alone, his 
share in the keys of the kingdom came from his being one of 
the numerous heads who are visibly connected throughout the 
world, and who are therefore in connection with the blessed 

1 Ep. lix. B. lv. 

* Episcopatus unus, episcoporum concordi numerositaU diffusus— one epi- 
scopate diffused by a visibly united (concordi) multitude of bishops (Ep. ad 
Antonian. lv.). The Oxford edition translates this * throughout an harmonious/ 
<fec, as though the abstract episcopate were one thing and the visible channel 
another. 



God.* 1 




—300 



ROME, THE RULING CHURCH 



57 



Apostle Peter. 9 Our Lord built the Church on Peter ' is the 
refrain of the Cyprianic doctrine. 

Thus far, then, the circumstances under which St. Cyprian 
wrote his treatise on Unity would not necessarily, nor 
even naturally, lead him to the subject of Papal jurisdic- 
tion. It was the rights of bishops over the laity, and the 
test of a lawful occupant of any see, Borne included, which 
occupied his attention ; the relationship of bishops to their 
mother-Church, whether in Carthage or in Rome, would have 
been irrelevant to his theme. 

m. At the same time he does in this part of his life inci- 
dentally touch on the See of Peter and its relation to the other 
sees of the Church, and in so doing he shows that he held 
strictly, in theory, to the supremacy of the See of Home. 
Peter had, according to our saint, his official representative in 
the Bishop of Borne. ' The place of Fabian ' (the Pope), was, 
according to St. Cyprian, « the place of Peter,' an expression 
which, as a matter of fact, he uses of the See of Borne 
alone. But further, in writing of Novatus who had gone 
from Carthage to Borne to join the schism of his all but name- 
sake Novatian, he describes the wickedness of the Novatians 
in ' setting up for themselves, without the Church and against 
the Church, a conventicle of their abandoned faction ; ' and 
then he proceeds to say, ' After all this, they yet in addition, 
having had a pseudo-bishop ordained for them by heretics, 
dare to set sail and to carry letters from schismatic and pro- 
fane persons to the chair of Peter, and to the principal [en- 
roling] Church, whence episcopal unity has taken its rise.' 1 

Now it is obvious from these words that St. Cyprian did not 
regard Carthage as being the See of Peter in the same sense 
that Borne was, for they went, he says, from Carthage to ' the 
chair of Peter.' Borne was, therefore, the chair of Peter in 
some way differing from Carthage, for it is described simply as 
1 the chair of Peter.' They were not going to every see — they 
were not about to make a tour of the globe, but going to Borne. 

Again, this ' chair of Peter ' is, according to St. Cypria 1 1 , 
the • principal Church.' Now we have seen that this expres- 
sion and its Greek equivalent occurring in St. IrenaBus can- 



• Ep. lix. 18, B. lv. 



Digitized by 




58 



AND SOURCE OF UNITY 



a.d. 96 



not mean the most ancient or the mother-Church. It means 
the ruling Church. Since Irenaeus wrote those words about 
Rome, Tertullian had defined the word as meaning 'that 
which is over anything/ 1 as the soul presides over and rules 
the body. At one time of St. Cyprian's life hardly a day 
passed without some study of Tertullian ; at spare moments 
he would say, ' Give me the master/ by which they understood 
that he wished to read Tertullian. We can, therefore, be 
fairly sure what he meant by the principal Church, viz. the 
sovereign ruling Church. When, therefore, these heretics 
went to Rome, they went, according to our saint, to 1 the chair 
of Peter and the ruling Church.' 

Again, it is the ruling Church * whence sacerdotal [i.e. epi- 
scopal] unity took its rise ; ' i.e. not the College of Bishops, for 
that took its rise from all the Apostles, but the * unity ' of the 
College which took its rise from the chair of Peter, i.e. from 
Peter considered as the origin of a succession. 2 

We have, then, here from St. Cyprian a distinct enuncia- 
tion of the Catholic and Roman teaching concerning the office 
of the See of St. Peter. It was not directly the mother of the 
episcopate, regarded as a line of mechanical succession, but 
of its unity : that is, of the episcopate, regarded as bound 
together in visible communion and invested with divine 
authority. 3 

But St. Cyprian adds yet another point. The ' chair ' 
suggests the teaching office, as ' the princedom ' implies go- 
vernment. And St. Cyprian adds that the Romans are ' they 

1 De Animdy c. 13. 

2 Mr. Puller (Prim, 88. p. 55) considers sacerdotalis unites to be the same 
as collegium sacerdotale, which is quite inadmissible, and he thus prepares the 
way for his strange contention that St. Cyprian is speaking of the chair of 
Peter as the mother-Church of Africa only. But St. Cyprian gives not the 
slightest hint that he is speaking of Africa only. And the word he translates 
mother {principalis) had already another signification as applied to Borne. Mr. 
Puller quotes a passage from Tertullian, which Gieseler quoted d propos of the 
passage in St. Irenseus ; but Dr. Ddllinger replied to Gieseler that we must 
adhere to the ordinary meaning of the word as expressly defined by Tertullian 
(GescJUchte, Ac, loc. cit.). And St. Augustine's expression, 4 in which the 
sovereignty was ever in force,' is a kind of echo or commentary of the same. 

9 At present the See of Peter is the mother of all the successions, for all 
have had to be replenished from her. 




—800 



AS THE CHAIR OF PETER. 



59 



to whom faithlessness can have no accesB.' Such is his 
ground of security when he contemplates these men sailing 
from Carthage to deceive the chair of Peter as to the correct- 
ness of his teaching. At this period of his life warm words 
of encomium invariably spring to his lips when he speaks of 
Borne; but his words, each one of them, contain serious 
teaching. Here the mention of Borne suggests the absurdity 
of these people supposing that the original source of episcopal 
unity will be untrue to its perpetual office on the momentous 
question which they wished to stir. 

But, after all, it may be said that the sovereignty attri- 
buted to the chair of Peter did not amount to much, seeing 
that St. Cyprian goes on to deprecate these people having 
gone to Borne, instead of being content with having their cause 
tried at Carthage. But did St. Cyprian mean by his protest 
against their sailing to Borne to deprecate any appeal under 
any circumstances ? It will be seen presently that this was 
not his meaning. He considered that, in this particular case, 
the number of the bishops who had tried these men was suffi- 
cient to settle the matter. So that the reference of matters 
to Borne depended, in his judgment, on the adequacy of the 
local episcopate in any given case to meet the needs of 
the occasion. 1 

St. Cyprian, therefore, expresses his confidence that these 
men will gain nothing by scuffling off to Borne, since it is the 
very source of unity, and the Bomans are they ' to whom per- 
fidy can have no access.' Unity (he says in effect) took its 
rise from the chair of Peter, and as it arose thence it will 
remain secure there. 

If now we compare the most recent exposition of this great 
passage in St. Cyprian with its Catholic interpretation, we 
have these results. 

On the one hand, Mr. Puller passes over the expression 
of our saint, ' the chair of Peter,' as being, in his judgment, 
the result of a delusion wrought into the Western Church's 
mind within the second century by the Clementine Bomance, 
a delusion whifch (he admits) was shared by the primitive 
saints for ever afterwards ! He translates ' principal ' as 



1 Cf. p. 69. 




60 



MISINTERPRETATIONS 



A.D. 96 



' original,' in defiance of Tertullian's definition and St. Augus- 
tine's explanation. He subordinates the primary idea in the 
term 'episcopal unity' to the secondary, by translating it 

* the episcopal body considered as a unity,' instead of keeping 

• the unity * as the substantive word ; and lastly, he narrows 
the contents of the word 4 principal,' as though it related only 
to Borne and the West, and especially Africa. 

On the other hand, in the Catholic interpretation, the 
words are taken in their plain, naked simplicity. Rome is 
1 the chair of Peter and the sovereign Church, whence the unity 
of the episcopate took its rise.' Here St. Peter is seen to be 
not a mere symbol, but the very source and commencement 
of a stream of unity (which is St. Cyprian's own simile), and 
the Apostle is a real foundation, not detached and built, as it 
were, in the air — not a source separated from its stream — nor 
a type with no genetic relationship between him and the unity 
he represents, but the edifice is continuous with the founda- 
tion, growing up from it and on it, so that it is true, as St. 
Cyprian is so fond of saying, that Peter is he ' on whom the 
Lord built the Church.' 

IV. We are now in a position to understand the full mean- 
ing of the famous passage in his treatise on Unity, written sub- 
sequently to the events described above, but in reference to 
them. After the opening paragraph, St. Cyprian at once 
proceeds to state, as he had done before in his letters, the 
cause of heresy and discord. 

It proceeds from this, that men do not go 1 to the origin 
of the truth ' (possibly ' unity ' is the true reading), nor is the 
head 1 sought, and they do not pay attention to the heavenly 
Master's teaching.' He our Master, has taught us where to 
find the head : namely, in the successor of Peter. ' For He said 
to Peter, " Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my 
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it ; and 
I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven." Upon 
one He builds His Church, and although He gives to all the 
Apostles after the resurrection equal power, yet ' — What is 
the restriction introduced by the ' yet ' ? What is the modify- 
ing truth ? It is that this gift to the rest of the Apostles does 
not exhaust the arrangement which Christ made for His 




—300 



OF ST. CYPRIAN. 



61 



Church. This gift does not interfere with the fact that He 
built His Church on one, for although He gave the rest equal 
power (e.g. to consecrate the Eucharist, to absolve, to teach 
infallibly, to found Churches), ' nevertheless , in order to mani- 
fest unity, He, by His own authority, instituted the origin of 
the same unity, so that it should begin from one/ 

Mr. Puller does not venture to translate the word 'manifest* 
by 1 symbolise/ but throughout he appears to understand them 
as equivalent. But it is one thing to symbolise and another 
to manifest ; and our Lord secured the manifestation of unity 
by * providing ' (disposuit l ) an actual origin ' beginning from 
one ' (ab uno incipientem). And then, that there may be 
no mistake, and that none may imagine that the difference 
between the rest of the Apostles and this ' origin of unity ' 
which Peter was made, amounted to a difference in the power 
of the priesthood, he repeats that undoubtedly 'the other 
Apostles were what Peter was, invested with an equal share of 
honour and power, but the commencement [of the Church] 
starts from unity, that the Church of Christ may be shown to 
be one.' And this unity is a thing to be held, and ' he who 
holds it not, does he think that he holds the faith ? ' 8 

Thus St. Cyprian traces all heresies to a neglect in looking 
for, or to, the head. Nec caput quceritur. The head is the bishop 
viewed as the heir of the promises made to Peter. He is in 
each place the link for the time being 3 of the chain which 
reaches down from the original head — namely, the Apostle 
Peter. For St. Cyprian never speaks of the Church being 
founded on St. James, or on St. John. He knew that they 
were foundations, but not in the unique sense in which Peter 
was. According to St. Cyprian the See of Rome was the See 
of Peter, and the chair of Peter was the principle of cohesion 
to the Christian episcopate. He was the Primate of the 
Christian Church, and showed his humility in not pressing 
this point at Antioch ; 4 and his chair inherits the Primacy 

1 • Unitatis ejusdem originem ab uno incipientem sua auctoritate disposuit.' 
Cf. the use of dupositio in Roman law for an * edict.' TV. on Unity, § 3. 

• Tr. on Unity, § 4. » Cf. Appendix I. 

4 Ep. lxzi. 2. Cf. p. S3 for the explanation of that passage. Dr. Dollinger 
remarks : ' Der Sinn ist : Petrus hatte sich dem Bechte nach auf Beinen 
Vorrang berufen kdnnen, aber in jenem Momente, als Paulus ihn mit gutem 




62 



COMMUNION WITH THE CHURCH, 



a.d. 90 



bestowed on him, for it is the principal or governing Church. 
They only are lawful bishops who, having been duly elected 
(a matter which was subject to arrangement on the part of 
the Church) are built into the one foundation and form part 
of that visibly compacted body, which resembles, not (so he 
says) the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and the garment of 
Ahijah, but the seamless robe of Christ. Such is the (strictly 
Papal) teaching of St. Cyprian. 

V. This teaching of St. Cyprian has an important bearing 
on the relation between orders and jurisdiction. ' We have 
orders/ it is said ; • is not that sufficient ? ' According to 
St. Cyprian it is not sufficient. We might be living in the 
deadly sin of schism in spite of our orders. We might be in 
possession of sacraments, yet without the sanctifying effects 
of the sacraments, from lack of jurisdiction. The Church, in 
St. Cyprian's teaching, is a visible kingdom ; it is a compact 
body, and the ceremony of episcopal ordination will not of 
necessity introduce a man into that network of holy organisa- 
tion which alone traces itself up to Peter, ' on whom the Lord 
built the Church.' We must be in communion with the rest 
of the Church in this sense, that our episcopate is acknow- 
ledged as a part of the succession from Peter by the compact 
brotherhood of bishops which comes down from the blessed 
Apostle Peter. Ecclesiastical intercommunion may be tem- 
porarily suspended, but we must be an acknowledged portion 
of the one Church, having inherited the legitimate succession 
and not forfeited our place in that one stream which, flowing 
from Peter, is ' diffused throughout the world by a concordant 
multiplicity of bishops.' And as ' episcopal unity took its 
rise,' according to St. Cyprian, 1 from the chair of Peter,' so 
from the chair of Peter it will always flow. To take a single 
instance, Nestorius and his followers forfeited their place in 
that compact unity, that 'concordant multiplicity.' Their 
decendants accordingly have no jurisdiction wherever they 
may be. Their episcopate is not part of the kingdom of 
Christ. It is not enough that they have orders, if they have ; 
the flaw in their title is that they cannot trace to Peter ' on 

Grand tadelte, ware es Hochmuth and Arroganze gewesen ' (Geschichte, Poriode 
I. p. 360), 




^300 



NOT MERELY ORDERS, 



63 



whom the Lord built the Church.' For in the year 431 they 
were extruded 1 from the unity of the episcopal brotherhood, 
just as afterwards the followers of Photius departed from the 
same unity. Wherever the Nestorians are, they are members 
of what St. Cyprian would call a ' conventicle of their own, 
beside the Church and against the Church.' 

The same would be true, according to Cyprianic principles, 
of the legalised episcopate in this country if its orders were 
admitted to be true. It never established itself in the king- 
dom of Christ, according to those principles. There was no 
authority recognised by the Church that confirmed the election 
of Parker. Eleven days after his consecration he confirmed 
the others, who yet were supposed to have elected him to the 
see. What could be in more flagrant defiance of all Cyprianic 
teaching ? 

Again, according to Cyprianic principles, where there is 
already a bishop in communion with the rest of the Catholic 
Church, exercising his jurisdiction, it would be a most grievous 
sin to consecrate another and introduce him on to the same 
field of work. For instance, there was in Quebec a bishop, in 
communion with the Catholic Church, exercising legitimate 
jurisdiction. Some two hundred years afterwards one appeared 
with the title of bishop, with letters patent from England. 
It was, if this person was in other respects a bishop, the 
deadly sin of schism on Cyprianic principles. Eventually 
the whole ground occupied by the Catholic Church was mapped 
out into districts, to which bishops, at least in title, were 
ordained by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and sent out to 
labour in a sphere already assigned to a Catholic bishop. 
' The Queen has been pleased by letters patent, under the 
Great Seal of the United Kingdom, to reconstitute the bishopric 
of Quebec, and to direct that the same shall comprise,' &c. 
9 Her Majesty has also been pleased to constitute so much of 
the ancient diocese of Quebec as comprises the district of 
Montreal to be a bishop's see and diocese,' &c* It is clear 

1 For the authority with which this was done, of. pp. 334-386. 

* I need hardly say that the laws of the Church of England, and not Her 
Gracious Majesty, are responsible. All Catholics must feel a special regard 
towards the present occupant of the throne. 



Digitized by 




64 



IS NECESSARY. 



a.d. 96—300 



from this, which is but one instance of a series of similar acts, 
that the Church of England at any rate does not proceed 
upon the lines of St. Cyprian's teaching. That saint must 
have denounced her line of action with all his fiery vehemence 
as destructive of his cherished principle, that there can be but 
one bishop and one altar. The only imaginable defence is 
that the Church of England is the entire Church of God on 
earth. The denunciation could then be left to St. Augustine, 
in his writings against the Donatists. 




CHAPTER VI. 



ST. CYPRIAN ON APPEALS TO BOMB. 



I. Thb essential points, then, in the teaching of St. 
Cyprian on the Unity of the Church are these. Every 
Christian finds himself under the rule of one pastor, who has 
to give an account of his rule to the one Lord of all (Ep. 
lv. B. lii.). To this one pastor or bishop the faithful in that 
district owe obedience in matters of faith and discipline. 

But this bishop is one of a compact body visibly united by 
intercommunion with all the rest ; and he derives his authority 
from the words of our Lord to St. Peter in Matthew xvi. 18. 
He is part of a stream whose united volume flows through the 
ages from that apostolic source. 1 He must be an accepted 
member of the great brotherhood of the ' one episcopate 1 a 
The episcopate is one body, and when one bishop has been 
regularly appointed to a district, no one can come in after him 
and claim the authority of Peter. 3 

These were the two points on which it was necessary to 
lay unequivocal and almost exclusive stress at the time 
when St. Cyprian wrote his treatise on Unity. The encroach- 
ments of some of the martyrs and confessors on the office of 
the head of the diocese in which those who applied to them 
lived, placed that office in jeopardy in the early part of his 
episcopate ; in the second, the legitimate occupancy of the 
See of Borne was questioned by Novatus and Novatian. The 
question could not be determined by any reference to the 

1 * De fonte uno rivi plurimi deflunnt . . . unites tamen servatur in origine ' 
(De Unit. Eccl. o. v.). 

* * Episcopates nnus, episcoporum multorom oonoordi numerositate diffu- 
sa! • (Ep. lv. B. lii.). 

• * Qaisqois post onum qui solas esse debeat f actus est, non jam secundus 
Ule, sed nullus est ' {Ep. lv. 6, B. lii. 8). 



F 



Digitized by 




66 



NECESSITY OF VISIBLE UNION. 



a.d. 96 



rights of the Bishop of Rome when once elected ; it was the 
legitimacy of his election which was in dispute. This St. 
Cyprian decided by asking who was the acknowledged bishop 
already in possession, legitimately elected, and in communion 
with the whole brotherhood of the legitimate clergy throughout 
the world. The Church, he maintained, cannot be likened to 
the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. 1 He expressly repudiated 
this state of things as a type of what could happen in the 
Church of Christ. The Church, he says, in effect, as he sets 
aside this discord under the Old Covenant, has an external 
visible unity of her bishops ; not because they themselves are 
visible, but because they are visibly united. (' De Unit. Eccles.' 
§ 6). He recurs to this contrast between the Old and New 
covenants in his letter to Magnus (Ep. lxix. B. lxxvL), and 
maintains that, so far from the two kingdoms of Israel and 
Judah being in any typical and ecclesiastical sense like the 
Christian Church,* our Lord's words about the Samaritans 
show that the ten tribes were not members of one kingdom 
in the sense in which people must be one in the Christian 
Church. 1 The Lord ratifieth us in His Gospel, that those 
same who had then severed themselves from the tribes of 
Judah and Jerusalem, and, having left Jerusalem, had with- 
drawn to Samaria, should be reckoned amongst profane and 
heathen 9 (Zoo. cit. § 5). 

The further question, as to the instrument and guardian 
of episcopal unity, did not at this period of his life call for 
any detailed treatment on the part of our saint. This question, 

1 4 When the twelve tribes of Israel were torn asunder the prophet Ahijah 
rent his garment. But because Christ's people cannot be rent, His coat, woven 
and conjoined throughout, was not divided by those it feU to. Individual, con- 
joined, coentwined, it shows the coherent concord of our people who put on 
Christ. In the sacrament and sign of His garment He has declared the unity 
of His Church 1 (De Unit. Eccles. § 6). 

* For the opposite contention cf . The Primitive Saints and the See of Borne, 
p. 227, where the writer maintains a theory of unity expressly condemned by 
St. Cyprian. The same position was maintained by Dr. Pusey, as where he 
says (speaking of St. Cyprian's words, * as the sun has many rayB,' &o.) : ' The 
oneness here spoken of is, according to Roman Catholics, fulfilled in the 
organisation of the whole Church ; whereas, according to Anglo-Catholics, it is 
fulfilled in each bishopric, each bishop, viewed by himself, being a fuU repre- 
sentation and successor of St. Peter ' (Cyprian's Tr. on Unity, § 4, note 6). 




—300 



ST. CYPRIAN DENOUNCES 



67 



however, is plainly answered in his writings. For the whole 
authority of the episcopate is traced to Peter, not, indeed, to 
the exclusion of the other Apostles, but as to their head, their 
representative, and summary. And allusions to the See of 
Peter occur precisely on those occasions when it would be 
natural for the topic of the centre or source of unity to come 
into incidental notice. When the five schismatics sailed to 
Borne, to try and hoodwink the Pope as to their number and 
importance, St. Cyprian expresses his security that they will 
not succeed, for they are going to the very see which is the 
source of episcopal unity — ' the chair of Peter and the 
Sovereign Church, whence episcopal unity took its rise.' And 
when he is persuading a brother-bishop that Cornelius is the 
legitimate occupant of that see, and he comes to the point 
where he has to insist on the fact that Cornelius superseded 
no one else, but that the see was vacant, he calls the see by its 
Christian name, • the place of Peter.' It was at once a Chris- 
tian see and a special see, 9 the place of Fabian, that is, the 
place of Peter, and the rank of the sacerdotal chair was 
vacant. 9 1 The See of Borne was thus in one respect the same 
as every other see, i.e., in respect to the SaaerdoHum ; it was a 
' sacerdotal chair,' but it was also, in its own way, 1 the place 
of Peter.' And his whole attitude towards that see was up 
to this time one of peculiar respect, deference, and veneration, 
as the centre of the Church's visible unity. 

I shall now examine his teaching on appeals to Borne. 

II. A fact that must strike us at once is that St. Cyprian 
denounced in no measured terms a certain small body of 
schismatics who repaired to Borne in the hope of persuading 
St. Cornelius, the Pope, that they were true bishops. But 
whilst the fact that they repaired thither showed their know- 
ledge of the value set on Bome's favourable judgment, their 
idea was not in the least that of an appeal in the regular 
sense of that term. The circumstances were as follows. 

An heretical bishop, named Privatus, who had been con- 
demned by ninety bishops, had come to Carthage and made 
one Fortunatus bishop over the Novatianists there. He had 



1 Ep. lv. 6, B. lii. 



F 2 



Digitized by 




68 



CERTAIN SCHISMATICS 



A.D. 96 



gathered round him four men whom St. Cyprian called 1 at 
the outset 'desperate and abandoned. 9 They were Felix, 
made bishop outside the Church, and Jovinus and Maximus, 
who had been condemned first by nine bishops, and then had 
been excommunicated a year since by a larger council — by 
'very many of us.' These were joined by one named 
Bepostus, who had lapsed into idolatry during persecution. 
These five men (says St. Cyprian), joined by ' a few who have 
either sacrificed or have evil consciences, chose Fortunatus 
to be their pseudo-bishop.' 

It was thus a little body which had no standing in the 
Church and no right of appeal. Sailing to Borne was a piece 
of impudence which our saint justly denounced as such. 
These ' desperate and abandoned ' fellows, as he calls them 
more than once, informed the Pope that twenty-five bishops 
were present at the ordination of Fortunatus. They had 
made the boast in Carthage itself that as many as twenty- 
five Catholic bishops were about to assist from Numidia. 
' In which lie,' says St. Cyprian, '.when they were afterwards 
detected and put to shame (five only who had made ship- 
wreck of the faith having met together, and these excom- 
municated by us), they then sailed to Borne with their 
merchandise of lies, as though the truth could not sail after 
them and convict their false tongues by proof of the real 
fact.' 2 

Such were the circumstances under which St. Cyprian 
very naturally, and with no prejudice to the general principle 
of appeals to Borne, invoked the decision of the African 
bishops that causes should be heard in Africa itself. These 
men were condemned criminals, condemned for moral delin- 
quencies and heresy, and they did not repair to Borne to re- 
open the case of their own crimes, but to persuade Borne that 
they had at their back an imposing array of bishops, and that 
Cyprian was dealing unjustly with the lapsed. 3 They said 
nothing about their past condemnation, of which St. Cyprian, 
therefore, had to inform the Pope. Their cause had been 
heard, and sentence had been passed against them. Fortunatus 

• Ep. lix. § 12, B. lv. » Ep. lix. § 18. 

' Cf. the latter part of the letter. 



Digitized by 



—300 



FOR SAILING TO ROME, 



69 



himself was only a pseudo-bi&hoj) ; he was, in reality, a 
presbyter under Cyprian's jurisdiction. As such he had no 
right of appeal straight to Rome, if indeed at all, under the 
peculiar regulations of the African province. 1 Anyhow, if he 
wished this sentence reversed, his obvious duty was first to 
clear himself in Africa, and then at least to observe the 
proper form of appeal. Instead of this, 'having had a 
pseudo-bishop ordained for them by heretics, they dare to 
set sail and to carry letters from schismatic and profane per- 
sons to the chair of Peter and the principal Church, whence 
the unity of the priesthood has taken its rise, remembering 
not that they are the same Romans whose faith has been 
commended by the Apostle, to whom faithlessness can have 
no access.' 

On one only plea, according to St. Cyprian, could such a 
transgression of the Church's laws be even imagined by any 
one to be justifiable — i.e. on the supposition (absurd enough) 
that the authority of the legitimate African bishops, who had 
tried and condemned them, was insufficient inpoint of numbers 
as compared with these ' desperate and abandoned ' men. It 
was this on which they had laid stress. But it was false. 
They had been twice condemned, on the last occasion by a 
numerous assembly of legitimate bishops. These men them- 
selves were neither legitimate bishops nor numerous. They 
were desperate and abandoned men, and few. 2 Those who 
judged them were sufficient in point of number and of weight. 
' For,' as St. Cyprian continues, 3 ' if the number of those who 
passed sentence on them last year 4 is reckoned together with 

1 Cf. Aug. Ep. xliii. (al. clxii.). 

a ' Nisi si paucis desperatis et perditis minor videtur esse auctoritas epieco- 
poram in Africa constitutorum.' • Unless the authority of the regular (constitu- 
torum) bishops in Africa seems less than [that of] a few desperate and aban- 
doned men.' Such an ellipse is common with Cyprian. If, however, ' paucis ' 
be taken as the dative governed by ' videtur/ the context still forces us to 
understand ' minor * as expressing comparison in point of number — 1 less than 
theirs.' But the immediate context suggests the first translation as the true one. 

* B. lv. § 15. The Oxford edition is doubtless correct in including this sen- 
tence in § 14. It is probably from not reading on, that some writers have 
been led into the mistake of supposing that the saint is comparing the African 
bishops with the Pope. 

4 The allusion is probably to the original smaller number, viz. nine. 




70 



BUT APPEALS TO THE POPE 



a.d. 96 



the presbyters and deacons, more were then present at the 
judgment and trial than these same men who are now seen to 
be joined with Fortunatus.' St. Cyprian, in his reasoning 
here, in no way offends against the general principle of 
appeals to Borne as formulated in the Vatican decrees. 1 He 
is dealing with a particular case in which the appellants, if 
such they could be called, had no standing in the Church 
and no ground of appeal. 

III. On the other hand, in dealing with the case of an here- 
tical bishop in Gaul, St. Cyprian distinctly acted on the suppo- 
sition that the Pope was the proper person to set in motion 
the excommunication of the leading bishop in that region. 

It would seem that St. Stephen, who had succeeded to the 
throne of Peter after the martyrdom of Lucius, had been slow 
to use his authority to the extent required, as St. Cyprian 
thought, in a case that was now brought before him. 
Marcian, Bishop of Aries, had withdrawn from the communion 
of the Church and attached himself to Novatian. He boasted 
that he had not been excommunicated, but had himself with- 
drawn, and no new bishop had been appointed. Application 
had been made to the Pope by the bishops of the province, 
but, for reasons which we cannot tell, he had not as yet acted 
in the matter. Accordingly, Faustinus, Bishop of Lyons, who 
belonged to the same province, 2 had on his own account com- 
municated with St. Cyprian, whose fiery nature was calculated 
to hasten a matter over which St. Stephen was taking his 
time. We often think the physician can attend to us and 
heal us more quickly than is perhaps possible. St. Cyprian 
wrote to the Pope and reminded him that the management of 
such a matter belonged to the episcopate, 3 and, as he implies, 
the requisite aid in this case could only come from St. 

1 The author of The Primitive Saints, <fcc. says : 4 It is for Ultramontanes 
who profess to venerate St. Cyprian and the early Church to consider whether 
they are prepared to accept his teaching or not.' Ultramontanes are prepared 
to accept St. Cyprian's teaching, but not Mr. Poller's translations. 

1 1 In eadem provincia ' (Ep. lxviii. B. lxvii.) is to be referred to Faustinus. 
Lyons and Vienne at that time were included in the province of Nar bonne 
(cf. Ammianus Marcell. lib. xv.). 

9 * Cui rei nostrum est consulere et subvenire.' For Mr. Puller's mistrans- 
lation of these words see infra, p. 76. 




—300 



TO EXCOMMUNICATE MARCIAN 71 



Stephen himself. St. Cyprian urged St. Stephen to effect 
this. He therefore urged the Pope to write ' letters of plenary 
authority [lit. most full letters l ] by means of which, Marcian 
being excommunicated, another may be substituted in his 
place.' He presses the Pope to immediate action on the 
ground that bishops have no ' greater or better office ' to per- 
form ' than by diligent solicitude and wholesome remedies to 
provide for cherishing and preserving the sheep.' He likens 
the flock at Aries to sailors who need another harbour, owing 
to the unsafety of their present one — and this new harbour he 
wishes St. Stephen to provide. They are like travellers whose 
inn is beset and occupied by robbers, and who seek other safer 
inns in their journey. These safer inns and this safer harbour 
ought, St. Cyprian contends, to be provided by St. Stephen by 
letters of excommunication — 'letters by which, Marcian 
having been excommunicated, another may be substituted 
in his place.' It was not advice that the bishops of Gaul 
needed ; St. Cyprian could give that. That, indeed, was all 
for which St. Cyprian himself was asked, and his reply was 
his urgent request to St. Stephen that he would, not advise, 
but direct letters of excommunication. The excommunication 
of a bishop was no new matter ; but as the martyrs of Vienne 
and Lyons had called to the Pope to aid them, so now the 
bishops of Gaul had appealed to the Pope, and to their think- 
ing had been left too long without the requisite aid. St. 
Cyprian, therefore, reminds St. Stephen that Marcian was 
trading on the lack of a formal excommunication, as though 
' he had not been excommunicated by us.' It only needed, in 
Cyprian's judgment, formal letters of excommunication to be 
issued by Stephen, with a mandate to elect a bishop in his 
place. He therefore asks him to comply with his prayer, and 
to notify with whom they are henceforth to communicate. 

St. Cyprian, indeed, not only by tiis request to the Pope 
concerning letters of excommunication and letters of com- 
munion, but by an incidental expression also, shows what 

1 Or, not merely a ' Papal brief/ but also a fall exposition of principles. Cf. 
the contrast between 1 per libellum aditio ' and 4 plenaria interpellate ' in the 
law of Honorius and Theodosius 4 de Navioulariis per Africam,' adduced by 
Constant. Ep. Bom. Pont. 



Digitized by 



72 



AND TO ANNOUNCE HIS SUCCESSOR. 



A.DU 96 



position St. Stephen occupied in his theory of Church govern- 
ment. Marcian was to be formally excommunicated because 
of his Novatian teaching. 'Let him not give, but receive 
sentence* (§ 4). Accordingly, St. Cyprian urges upon St. 
Stephen that his predecessors in the see (' our * predecessors, 
he calls them, so full is he of the perfect unity of the Church) 
had given judgment on Novatian's teaching. They, he says — 
i.e. Popes Cornelius and Lucius, whom he has just mentioned 
by name — 4 they, full of the Spirit of God and in the midst of 1 
a glorious martyrdom, decided that communion (pax) should 
be granted to the lapsed, and by their own letters they sealed 
their decision that the fruit of communion and peace was not 
to be denied them when penance had been done ; which we 
all everywhere altogether judged. For there could not be a 
difference of thought (diversus sensus) amongst us, seeing 
that there was one Spirit in us' (in quibus unus esset 
Spiritus). I do not see how one could better express the 
mutual relations between the Holy See and the rest of the 
Church, and the common charisma of infallibility possessed by 
the Pope and the Church, than in these golden words. What 
do they teach ? They say that the Popes decided the question, 
full of the Holy Ghost ; that the whole Church agreed, and 
that it could not be otherwise, considering they were under 
the influence of the same Spirit (cf. p. 830). 

Accordingly, St. Cyprian says that St. Stephen is bound 
to honour the judgments of his predecessors by his own 
1 weight and authority.' * Marcian, therefore, will be deposed, 
and the name of his successor notified by the authority of the 
Pope. Marcian's name disappeared from the diptychs.* 

IV. Once more, before the turn in his life, St. Cyprian 
showed his acceptance of the principle of Papal jurisdiction. 
I say the principle, for he objected to the particular exercise 
in this case. tfwo bishops had been deposed in Spain for 

1 < Constituti.' I have for this word adopted the Oxford translation. 

* He had given as his reason why Stephen should excommunicate Marcian : 
* Servandus est . . . Cornelii et Lucii honor gloriosns ; ill! enim dandara esse 
lapsis pacem censuerunt ' (Ep. lxi.), on which Ddllinger remarks : * The word 
honor frequently occurs in the writings of St. Cyprian with the meaning of 
auctoritas or potestas 1 (Hist, of Ch. Period I. cap. 8, § 4). 

* Cf. Mabillon, Annal, torn. iii. p. 452. 




—300 



HE PROTESTS THAT BASILIDES 



73 



having taken out certificates of idolatry 1 during the late 
persecution. Their names were Basilides and Martial. More- 
over two bishops had been appointed in their place, Sabinus 
and Felix. Basilides, and probably Martial also, appealed 
to Borne. Obviously it was not the first time that such an 
appeal had been made. St. Stephen, as St. Clement before 
him, restored them, or ordered them to be restored to com- 
munion, whether by reason of the irregularity with which 
their case had been conducted, bishops having been appointed 
in their place without his cognisance (which St. Cyprian's words 
in Martian's case [p. 71] show to be an irregular proceeding), or 
whether St. Stephen was simply taken in by Basilides' state- 
ment, we do not know, as the necessary evidence is not forth- 
coming. But several bishops of the region appear to have 
accepted the Pope's ruling, and communicated with Basilides 
and Martial ; and accordingly Felix and Sabinus looked round 
about for help in the shape of counsel and advice as to what they 
were to do. This is expressly stated by Cyprian. To him they 
naturally went for such help, considering the prominent part 
he had taken in the matter of the lapsed during persecution. 
St. Cyprian held a council and advised their people to cling to 
them as their real bishops. The probability is, as Baronius 
thought, that these two were sent to Borne with the conciliar 
letter to help towards their acceptance by the Pope. 

The important point, however, for us is the way in which 
our saint dealt with the authority of the Pope. He nowhere 
denies it as a matter of principle, but he sees some restric- 
tion in it's claim to obedience. He considered that the Pope 
had been overreached, and says that although there was some 
fault in this in the way of negligence, the real sin lay at the 
door of the bishop who had deceived the Pope. 2 He is 
describing the aim of this bishop — it was 'to be replaced 
unjustly in his episcopate from which he had been rightly 
deposed.' 

1 J.e. certificates of having sacrificed, which saved them from civil punish- 
ment, whether they had actually sacrificed or not. 

* * Hoc eo pertinet ut Basilidia non tarn abolita sint qnam oamulata delicta, 
at ad superiors peccata ejus etlam fallacis et circumventionis crimen acces- 
serit ' (Ep. lxviii.). 



Digitized by 




74 



IS UNJUSTLY RESTORED, 



aj>. 96 



Not a word has St. Cyprian to Bay against the possibility 
of a bishop being replaced in his bishopric by the Pope. 
Had our saint held the view that the Pope could not restore 
a bishop who had been deposed by his surrounding colleagues, 
it must have appeared. But no, the power of St. Stephen is 
not for a moment questioned. It is the certainty of Basilides' 
crimes that is put forward as the ground for considering the 
restoration null and void. 1 The injustice consisted in the 
certainty of his crimes. St. Cyprian writes with some 
emotion — indeed, to some extent, without the self-restraint 
which one would desire ; but he does not even remotely hint 
at any lack of authority on the part of the Pope. He says 
that he is ' far away and unaware of the true state of the 
case' (§ 5), not that he is assuming a power which he 
does not possess. Instead of settling the matter by that 
obvious rejoinder, he holds a council and decides that St. 
Stephen has been deceived by false statements, and that 
Basilides, so far from deserving reinstatement in his bishopric, 
has only added to his crimes by the falsehoods he has told 
the Pope. For the position of Basilides is really one, says 
St. Cyprian, which had been provided for by Pope Cornelius 
and the rest of the bishops. So that our saint is avowedly 
acting under the shelter of a Papal decision with which the 
whole Church had agreed (§ 6). 

It is unfortunate that we have no sufficient evidence on 
which to form a judgment as to the whole case. We have 
only Cyprian's side. And he does not exhibit a very judicial 
tone of mind, so far as the scanty record goes. There is no 
appearance of his having consulted St. Stephen on the matter 
at all, which, whatever the latter's position, would, to say the 
least, have been a matter of courtesy. We do not know on 
what grounds St. Stephen formed his judgment, nor what 
exactly his judgment was. St. Cyprian's own account is taken 
only from the aggrieved party. And if St. Stephen could be 
deceived, so could St. Cyprian. And if, as the latter says, 
St. Stephen was too far off, St. Cyprian was further off. The 

1 Compare the case of Bishop Grosseteste, who, whilst owning himself 
bound to filial obedience to the Holy Father, felt that His Holiness could not 
be aware of the candidate proposed by him. 




-300 



BEING GUILTY OF CRIMES. 



75 



intercourse between Home and Spain was greater than that 
between Spain and Carthage; and Spain was more closely 
connected from a civil as well as ecclesiastical point of view, 
with Borne than with Carthage. And why did Felix and 
Sabinus go to Carthage instead of to Borne, where they might 
have disabused the Pope of his prejudice, if such it was, 
against their case? St. Stephen's character was, according 
to St. Vincent of Lerins, that of a ' holy and prudent ' man. 
According to St. Dionysius, he assisted all parts of Arabia 
and Syria by his letters. 1 We have a right, therefore, to 
suspend our judgment as to his negligence, on the principle of 
* audi alteram partem.' What we gather for certain from the 
letter of Cyprian is, that in spite of some vehemence, he did 
not dispute the principle that the Pope could, where just 
cause existed, restore a deposed bishop of Spain. The editors 
of Migne's magnificent collection of the whole literature on 
the subject endorse the supposition of Baronius, that Felix 
and Sabinus went with the letter of the Carthaginian synod 
to Borne, and that St. Cyprian's intent was to move St. 
Stephen to sanction the deposition of Basilides and Martial. 
But in point of fact our materials are insufficient for under- 
standing the matter fully, and we do not know the sequel. 
It looks as if it would not be difficult for the Evil One to 
produce a rupture between these two saints, one of whom was 
full of holy vehemence, and the other of holy prudence. 
' Coming events cast their shadow before.' 

Note. — It is astonishing how anyone could fail to see in the 
affair of Marcian of Aries an emphatic testimony to the strictly 
Papal method of government as existing in the Church at that 
time, and taken for granted by St. Cyprian. Rigaltius, whose 
inaccuracy in regard to the text of this letter was pointed out by 
Baluze,* has, however, been greatly followed by anti-Papal writers. 
He is quoted at length in the Oxford edition of the Fathers, 3 but 
the editor (Dr. Pusey) felt compelled to add in a note that Rigaltius 
' seems anxious to understate the eminence conceded to Rome. A 

1 Enseb. lib. vii. c. 2, 4. 

* EpiatdUB S. Stephani. S. Cypr. ad 8. Stephanwn {Ep. i. p. 1027, note 
10. Migne, 1865). 

* Vol. iii. pt. 2, p. 217 (1844). 




76 ' CONSULERE REI 1 IS NOT ' ADVISE ' a.d. 96—800 



deference does seem to be paid to him, not on account of bis near- 
ness only ; be exercises an eminent authority , although only [sic] 
as the executive of the rules of the Universal Church.' 

But the most recent anti-Papal writer 1 contends that it was only 
for the sake of obtaining St. Stephen's advice for these bewildered 
bishops of Gaul that St. Cyprian wrote. Our saint, however, says 
nothing about advice. He is, indeed, made to speak of advice by 
this writer's translation, according to whom the words, ' It is ours 
to advise and come in aid ' are the equivalent of the Latin ' cui rei 
nostrum est consulere et subvenire ' ! * It is easy after such a 
manipulation of the text to make out that ' St. Cyprian presses on 
Stephen the duty of writing a Utter of counsel and help.' But, 
even if this writer's incorrect translation of the above words could 
be passed, the words could not be considered exhaustive of what St. 
Cyprian wished from the Pope. A letter of counsel and help is not 
exactly the equivalent of ' letters to the province,' whereby, Marcian 
being ' excommunicated, another may be substituted in his place.' 
Yet these are what St. Cyprian asks the Pope to send. And, again, 
letters to ' signify plainly to us who has been substituted at Aries 
in the room of Marcianus [loc. cit. § 6], that we may know to 
whom we should direct our brethren and to whom we should write,' 
are something more than mere counsel and advice. They imply an 
1 eminent authority.' 

1 Rev. F. W. Puller, Primitive Saints and the See of Rome, pp. 62-65. 

* Of. Faeeiolati on the word consulo. • Cum dativo signiflcat habere rationem 
et cur am alicujus rei, tueri, providere, prospieere.' Foroellini's edition, by J. 
Bailey, FJR.S. (1828). 




CHAPTER VII. 



bt. cyprian's error on baptism bt heretics. 

We now come to the events in St. Cyprian's life which have 
dimmed the splendour of his glory and led some to invoke him 
as the patron of their isolated position. If from his throne of 
glory he could shed a burning tear of sorrow, it would, I con* 
ceive, be over the false views of history that can select an 
incident in his otherwise holy life, which his glorious mar- 
tyrdom threw into the shade, and indeed washed out, and 
which forms no proper basis of a theory of Church government. 
The Donatists perpetually quoted Cyprian to St. Augustine ; 
he replied, not by denying his error, but by pointing out his 
determination not to break with Rome. 1 There are those in 
our days who are fond of quoting his quarrel with Rome 
(which St. Augustine calls a brotherly altercation) on a ques- 
tion which he considered one of variable discipline only, and 
treating of it as though he thought it a matter of faith and 
essential discipline. We will give a short summary of this 
unhappy episode in his career. 

I. It was apparently his conflict with the Novatians which 
led St. Cyprian into his error concerning baptism by heretics. 
His fundamental tenet was the sin of breaking with the 
society founded on Peter. It was a sacred principle, but 
he drew a conclusion which conflicted with the Church's 
teaching. Heretics were separate from this one society, and 
therefore, he added, they could not baptise, for they could not 
give the Holy Ghost to others, being themselves bereft of His 
grace. He did not realise that heretics might nevertheless 
carry with them some debris of Catholic truth, and above 
all an indelible 4 character ' with some rights and privileges 
still remaining. 8 Their baptism was indeed 1 vain and profit- 

1 Cf. Ep. 93, 40. * Cf. Freppel's Saint Cyprien, 1890, p. 821. 




78 



ST. CYPRIAN SHOWING 



a.d. 96 



less, having a semblance but nothing real as an aid to holi- 
ness,' as St. Athanasius said ; l but although it was shorn of its 
sanctifying effects, it was not therefore void of all value in the 
supernatural sphere. But St. Cyprian had already exhibited 
symptoms of pressing his thesis, that outside the Church 
there is no salvation, to an excess of rigour. He had said in 
his treatise on the Unity of the Church, speaking of schis- 
matics, ' Their waters soil instead of purifying,' and ' their 
illegitimate birth gives children to the devil, not to God. 9 His 
very horror of heresy and schism became a stumbling-block 
to him. We cannot, moreover, but feel that the influence of 
his master Tertullian was not without its effect. Tertullian 
had himself broached the false opinion that it was impossible 
to receive baptism amongst heretics ; and Agrippinus, one of 
St. Cyprian's predecessors in the see of Carthage, had begun 
to rebaptise those who had received baptism only at the 
hands of those in schism. Cyprian followed suit, but he 
met with opposition from some of the bishops of his own 
province. The position which St. Cyprian assumed was that 
those who had received baptism from heretics ought to be re- 
baptised, but that it was one of those matters of discipline 
about which they might disagree, without forfeiting each 
other's communion. 

It was a question which had already agitated one part of 
the East. Two synods, one at Iconium and the other at 
Synnada, had issued decrees in favour of rebaptising, and 
Firmilian, Bishop of Ceesarea, in Cappadocia, had taken a 
prominent part in promoting this discipline. He had even 
gone to the length of rebaptising some who had received 
baptism from a bishop who had fallen into the sin of idolatry 
under persecution. But as in Africa so in the East the 
practice was novel, and if we take the East as a whole, Fir- 
milian had few followers. Still the matter was now assuming 
serious proportions, as the Novatians at Borne had begun to 
rebaptise Catholics when they induced them to apostatise, 
and the influence of Cyprian's name was a serious addition 

1 Mr. Poller, in quoting this passage (Prim. Saints, p. 78) seems to have 
misunderstood its meaning. St. Athanasius does not deny the validity of 
baptism by heretics, but He sanotifying effects. 




—300 



A LACK OF PRECISION 



79 



to the confusion. He was consulted by eighteen bishops of 
Ntrmidia as to the practice of rebaptising which his prede- 
cessor, Agrippinus, had introduced, and he decided in favour 
of the practice. This was the beginning of the disturbance 
in Africa. St. Cyprian alleged various reasons of minor con- 
sequence, such as the impossibility of the water being blessed 
by priests out of communion with the Church, or of the oil 
used in baptism being consecrated by those who being out- 
side the Church had neither altar nor church ; but his main 
reasons were derived from the oneness of the Church, the un- 
worthiness of the minister, and the incapacity of the subject. 1 

The whole of St. Cyprian's reasoning shows the truth of 
St. Augustine's remark, that the matter had not yet been 
thoroughly sifted and elucidated. 

And St. Cyprian maintained his point with such logical 
acumen and eloquence that St. Augustine says he should 
probably have thought the same, seeing that the matter had 
not then been discussed in all its bearings in a plenary 
council. We may gather from what St. Augustine also says 
that, in spite of this, he would have submitted to the ruling 
of the Holy See, as he evidently considers St. Cyprian should 
have done, and indeed thinks that he possibly did.* 

St. Cyprian's three points, on which he insisted, contained 
each of them a separate misunderstanding. 8 In insisting that 
because there is but one Church no baptism outside the 
Church could be valid, he did not realise the doctrine first 
expounded in all its fulness by St. Augustine concerning the 
' soul ' of the Church. He limited the supernatural action of 
our Lord to the confines of the visible Church. 4 Again, in 
denying that a heretic, being himself without the grace of 
God, could be the minister of that grace to others, he was 

1 Freppel's Saint Cyprien, p. 889. 

* * Fortasse factum est ' (De Bapt. lib. ii. cap. 4). 

* Cf. Freppel, Joe. cit. p. 329 seq. 

* As Bishop Freppel says : 4 A precise distinction between the visible Church 
(or assemblage of the faithful under the government of legitimate pastors) and 
the invisible Church, formed of all whom divine grace has sanctified, would 
have sufficed to remove aU difficulty.' St. Augustine answers : ' Ecclesia quippe 
omnes per baptism urn parit, sive apud se, sive extra se ' (De Bapt. c. Do?!, i. 14). 
And again : * An extra unitatem Ecclesia? non habet suaChristus ? ' (Ibid* to, 9), 




80 



IN HIS TEACHING, 



JL.D. 96 



really establishing, what he repudiated in word, the depend- 
ence of the sacrament on the dispositions of its minister. 
He drew, indeed, a distinction between those within the Church 
who were living in sin and those without the Church who had 
no share at all in divine grace. But he was again seriously 
trenching upon the full teaching concerning the visible 
Church, and endangering the very idea of a sacrament. 

And in laying stress on the impossibility of men who were 
in rebellion against God receiving a sacrament which con* 
ferred divine grace, he was ignoring the difference between 
the reception of a sacrament and its sanctifying effects, St. 
Augustine points out that St. Cyprian ignored the character 
conferred by the sacrament of baptism which did not, indeed, 
involve the recipient's sins being forgiven, but which made 
the reiteration of the sacrament impossible. Its effects 
slumbered till the baptised person made his submission to the 
Catholic Church. Infants baptised by heretics would, on St. 
Cyprian's teaching, forfeit heaven ; but St. Cyprian could 
never be induced to enter on that part of the subject. In 
fact the whole subject was one which had not, in St. Cyprian's 
day, formed part of the ordinary teaching of the Church, and 
was new to many. There was, therefore, room for question 
and discussion. At Borne, whither heretics always found 
their way only to be extinguished by the Apostolic tradition, 
which it was the special province of Borne to guard, the 
matter had been dealt with, as St. Augustine says, in accord- 
ance with a traditional discipline received from the Apostles 
themselves. And this Apostolic tradition was destined to 
prevail, but not without a struggle. 

There was at Borne a pontiff who was, to use the words of 
St. Vincent of Lerins, ' a man holy and prudent.' He had, 
perhaps, already shown some prudence in abstaining from 
precipitate action in the case of Marcian of Aries, and had 
evinced a repugnance to proceed to extreme measures in the 
case of the two Spanish bishops who appealed to Borne. But 
his zeal for the faith committed to his charge would not 
permit him to act with remissness in this case. St. Stephen 
felt himself bound to resist this innovation on the immemorial 
practice of the Church with the most determined energy. It 




—300 



IS RESISTED BY THE POPE. 



81 



was resisted by the Episcopate of the Church as a whole, but, 
says St. Vincent of Lerins, 'Pope Stephen, of blessed memory, 
who at that time was prelate of the Apostolic See, resisted, in 
conjunction with his colleagues, yet more than they, thinking 
it fit, I suppose, that he should surpass all others in the 
devotedness of his faith as much as he excelled them by the 
authority of his station/ 

This 1 holy and prudent * Pope saw that the practice of 
the Church on this matter of rebaptising was closely con- 
nected with the faith, and he had already threatened to 
suspend communion with Firmilian and his sympathising 
bishops until such time as they brought their practice into 
accord with what he knew to be Apostolic discipline. 1 St. 
Cyprian, however, persisted in viewing the matter as one of 
pure discipline, and not involving a matter of faith, although 
worth maintaining at great cost. And further, as we have 
said, he considered all along that the practice pursued at 
Borne involved the admission that forgiveness of sins was 
conferred by the baptism of heretics in the same way as by 
baptism in the visible Church. 

II. On being appealed to by the eighteen Numidian bishops 
for advice on the subject, some of their colleagues being op- 
posed to the practice, St. Cyprian convoked a council of about 
thirty bishops, and they decided in favour of rebaptising. 
About the same time he was applied to by a Bishop of Mau- 
ritania, named Quintus, on the same subject, to whom he 
wrote an answer which has been preserved. He emphasises 

1 Their actual excommunication was averted through the representations 
and entreaties of St. Dionysius of Alexandria. Stephen had written, says 
Eusebius, * as neither about to communicate with them.' Mr. Poller's trans- 
lation, * saying that he would not communicate with them ' (Prim. Saints, p. 
329), which he thinks represents St. Stephen as having already effected a 
separation, goes beyond the Greek, which is as I have written it— 1 he had 
written ... as not about to communicate with them either.' The Greek is 
simply in the future. Not possessing the letters, we could not say whether 
Ensebius is speaking of a sententia ferenda or lata— an actual or conditional 
excommunication— were it not for the context, which shows that the excom. 
munication was not actually carried into effect. St. Dionysius averted it by 
his prayers and entreaties. He gained his namesake at Rome and Philemon 
over to his way of thinking. They had previously thought with Stephen that 
the rebaptisers ought to be excommunicated. 



G 




82 



D0E8 NOT DEPRECIATE TRADITION, a.d. 96 



two points — viz. that baptism is one, and therefore cannot 
be repeated, and that ancient customs are not always to be 
followed. On the first point he adduces a passage from Holy 
Scripture, which he misquotes, having, we may presume, an in- 
correct copy. He relies on a passage in Ecclesiasticus (xxxiv. 
80), which he gives thus: 'He that is washed by one dead, 
what availeth his washing ? ' A heretic is dead, and there- 
fore what is the use of the washing, or baptism, administered 
by him ? But the passage really runs : ' He who washes him- 
self after having touched a dead body, if he touches it again, 
of what use is his ablution ? ' In dealing with the question 
of custom he expressed himself with more conciseness than 
caution, so that his words have been (wrongly) interpreted as 
a depreciation of tradition. He says that we 1 must not frame 
a prescription on custom, but prevail by reason* — words 
which, without proper explanation, may be said to contain 
the microbe of nationalism. But elsewhere he says that 
« custom without truth is only ancient error ' — which is cer- 
tain ; only it is equally certain that such a custom would not 
prevail in the Church. The Bride of Christ is incapable of 
the stain of adultery, as he himself teaches elsewhere ; yet 
she would be unchaste if she sanctioned a custom contrary 
to truth, to the extent that, as a matter of fact, she had taken 
home to herself this custom. She had, as a whole, upheld the 
validity of baptism conferred by heretics. One of the bishops 
at the third council held at Carthage on this subject said 
that 4 Jesus Christ said " I am the truth," not " I am custom/' • 
which is true enough ; but it is also true that He said to the 
Apostles in sending them out to teach, ' I am with you all 
days to the end of the world,' and consequently no custom on 
so important a matter could attain to prevail in the Holy 
Catholic and Apostolic Church. 1 St. Cyprian did not really 
disagree with the rest of the Church as to the value of tradi- 
tion, but as to the fact in this particular case. ' A sound 
critic,' says Bishop Freppel, 1 should pronounce judgment in 
accordance with the entire trend of the discussion, not abuse 
a word which has escaped in the heat of argument.' Both 

1 Cf. FreppePs Cyprien, p. 337, 1890; and Rohrbacher, Hist de VEglise, iii. 
pp. 806-7. Paris, 1892. 



Digitized by 



—300 



BUT THINKS HIMSELF THE SUBJECT 



83 



St. Cyprian and Firmilian maintained that the contrary tra- 
dition was a human one — one 4 that had crept in amongst 
gome. 9 1 This was Firmilian's root mistake. He denied, or 
was unaware of, the antiquity and universality of the tradition 
against rebaptising ; in other words, he failed to see that it 
had the two great marks of being a divine tradition — viz. 
antiquity and universality. 2 

Having insisted on the duty of upholding the unity of the 
Church, of yielding in nothing to the enemies of faith and 
truth, and of not laying down the law on the growth of 
custom, but seeking to triumph by reason, St. Cyprian appeals 
to the conduct of Peter at Antioch. He had begun his letter 
by mentioning that 4 some of their colleagues * were in oppo- 
sition — those, of course, who had led to the Numidian bishops 
consulting him on the question. And seeing that a second 
council was considered necessary, these African bishops who 
differed from their Primate, and probably thought that he was 
setting himself up as a sort of bishop of bishops, must have 
resisted the decree of the first council in the previous year. 
St. Cyprian, therefore, in a letter to a bishop named Quintus, 
deprecates the idea that he is forcing his own judgment in 
pressing concordant action on these African colleagues, and at 
the same time supplies them with a model of acquiescence in 
the suggestion of another. He adduces the example of the Pri- 
mate of the Apostles. Peter himself did not, on the ground of 
his Primacy, 3 refuse to accept a better mode of carrying out 

1 Ep. ad Pompeium, lxxiv. 

* Freppel, loc. tit. 

• St. Cyprian did not 4 point out that, if in consequence of this priority ' (as 
the author of Primitive Saints, dc. translates prima turn), « St Peter had ex- 
pected St. Paul to obey him, he would have been guilty of insolence and arro- 
gance ' (Prim. Saints, p. 358). He assumed that St. Peter had a primacy 
which he might have pressed, but did not out of humility. St. Augustine (De 
Bapt. lib. ii. o. 1) quotes this passage of St. Cyprian, and speaks of ' the Apostle 
Peter, in whom the primacy over the Apostles is pre-eminent, with such sur- 
passing grace,' being 1 corrected by the later Apostle Paul.' And then, in com- 
paring St. Cyprian with St Peter (as having erred, but as not likely to resent 
St Augustine's revision of his judgment on baptism by heretics), he expresses 
a fear lest he should be reviling Peter by the mere comparison. He says : * For 
who is ignorant that principality over the Apostles is to be placed above any 
episcopate ? ' But if * there is a distance between the grace of the chairs ' (i.e. 
if the position of the Prince of the Apostles is beyond that of any bishop) 4 their 



o 2 




84 



OF A HIGHER REVELATION. 



A.D. 98 



their common faith, 1 giving us thereby a pattern of concord 
and patience, that we should not pertinaciously love our own 
opinions, but should rather account as our own any true and 
rightful suggestions of our brethren and colleagues for the 
common health and weal.' He then quotes from i. Cor. xiv. 29, 
80, as containing St. Paul's teaching ' that many things are 
revealed to individuals for the better ; and that we ought not 
each to strive pertinaciously for what he has once imbibed and 
held, but if anything has appeared better and more useful, 
willingly to embrace it. For to have what is better offered to 
us is not to be instructed, but to be defeated.' He then 
reminds them, through Quintus, that he is himself only 
following the judgment of one of his predecessors, Agrippinus, 
who had acted after * common counsel ; ' * whose sentence, 
being both religious, and legitimate, and salutary, in accordance 
with the Catholic faith and Church, we also have followed.' 

Thus, earnestly and in all humility, did our saint en- 
deavour to bring the whole array of bishops in his own 
province into conformity on this practice, which, although 
not in his estimation a matter of necessity, yet called for 
harmonious action. But he treads on dangerous ground 
when he speaks of his discipline in the matter as a develop- 
ment or improvement on previous practice. 

III. But in the following year St. Cyprian found it necessary 
to call a second council at Carthage, to consider particularly, 
amongst other matters, this same question. For the African 
bishops who had dissented from his ruling were not so easily 
brought into line. 

This second and larger synod decided that 'those who 
have been washed without the Church and have, amongst 
heretics and schismatics, been tainted by the defilement of profane 
water, when they come to us and to the Church which is one, 
ought to be baptised ; 9 and, moreover, they decided that all 
who had once left the Church, or had been ordained amongst 
the sects, could only be received back into lay communion. 

glory as martyrs is one.* Neither St. Augustine's nor St. Cyprian's words can 
be satisfactorily explained except on the supposition that they understood St. 
Peter's relation to the Apostles to be one which could demand obedience. St. 
Augustine thus explains * primacy ' by 4 principality.' 




—300 



THINKS KEBAPTISM 



85 



They ought not 'to retain those arms of ordination and 
honour wherewith they rebelled against us. It is enough 
that to such on their return pardon be granted.' 

Closely following upon this council, St. Cyprian wrote a 
long letter 1 to a bishop named Jubaianus, in which he uses 
the arguments noticed above in answer to a letter forwarded 
by this bishop, and remits to him the letter of Quintus and 
the decree of the synod. In the course of this letter he 
repudiates the argument drawn from the fact that Novatian 
the schismatic Bishop at Borne, had taken to rebaptising. It is 
no concern of ours, says St. Cyprian, what he may do, who, 
like an ape, claims to himself the authority and truth of the 
Catholic Church. ' We who hold to the head and root of the 
one Church know . . . that he hath no hallowed office.' The 
' head and root ' was the Bishop of Borne, who traced to Peter 
(cf. p. 49), or perhaps, more strictly speaking, Peter himself, 
whom they reached through Stephen and not through Novatian.* 

It was in this letter also that St. Cyprian, in defining what 
the Church is, where it is to be found, says in effect what 
St. Ambrose said, ' where Peter is, there is the Church. 9 
He deals with the question as to where and by whom remis- 
sion of sins can be given. And he at once says, that * to 
Peter first, on whom He built the Church, and from whom 
He appointed and showed that unity should spring (§ 7, 
Oxf. transl.), was this power given. 9 And then he quotes the 
words spoken to Peter and the Apostles on Easter-night. So 
that, according to St. Cyprian, unity was to spring from Peter 
by our Lord's institution, and the power of remitting sins was 

1 Ep, lxxiii. 

* Mr. Poller (Primitive Saints, p. 345) has mistaken the meaning of this 
passage through imagining that St. Cyprian is arguing with the Novatians* 
He is arguing with Jubaianus, or rather his correspondent, about Novatian. 
* We' (ix. you and I and others) 'hold to "the head and root of the one 
Church " ' (ijt. the legitimate Bishop of Borne), 4 and consequently we know 
that " nothing is lawful " to Novatian, because he is out of that one Church, 
separate from the head and root of the one Church.' Mr. Puller also argues 
that St. Cyprian could not mean Stephen by ' the head and root of the one 
Church,* because * St. Cyprian was opposing Stephen ' (p. 846). But this is an 
anachronism. Stephen had not yet appeared on the scene. Moreover, even if 
he had, St. Cyprian would still have held that he was the head of the Church. 
He would have added, that although such, he was going beyond his powers in 
insisting on obedience in this matter. Cf. Appendix I. 




86 



AN OPEN QUESTION. 



a.d. 96 



possessed in that body which had originated with the Apostolic 
College, of which St. Peter was the head, and his chair the 
origin of its unity. 

It seems that the letter which Jubaianus had forwarded 
laid down the proposition that 'All, wheresoever and howsoever 
baptised in the name of Jesus Christ, have obtained the grace 
of Christ.' Against this proposition St. Cyprian urges hi8 
strongest arguments, and with some reason. 

He concludes this forcible and eloquent letter with a 
disclaimer which is the real key to all that followed. He 
refuses to consider his practice in any other light than as 
a matter of discipline, which he had no intention of erecting 
into a general rule. He refuses to judge others in this 
matter. Each bishop is to do what he thinks right, having 
the ' free exercise of his judgment.' (§ 22.) This was the 
burden of his teaching on this subject, that it was a matter in 
which each bishop was free to administer his own diocese as 
he thought fit. There seems little doubt but that St. Cyprian 
knew that a different practice prevailed at Borne. But he did 
not place this matter on a level with the treatment of the 
lapsed ; there the dogmatic faith seemed to be more nearly 
concerned, and on that point it seemed to him necessary that 
the practice of all the Churches should be one (cf. p. 52). 
Accordingly he submitted his judgment on that question to 
the Boman clergy. 

The weak point in St. Cyprian's attitude was that, whilst 
he again and again declared that every African bishop should 
be free to act as he thought best, he yet supported his own 
practice by considerations of great dogmatic importance. He 
says, ' We ought to keep firmly the truth and faith of the 
Catholic Church ; ' and yet he is for leaving each bishop free 
to do as he thinks best. If it was part of the Church's faith, 
how could he leave it open ? If it was not part of the Church's 
faith, was he not too vehement and somewhat overbearing ? 
But as St. Augustine says, in regard to the whole matter, on 
which he so profoundly disagreed with St. Cyprian, * We are 
men.' There are inconsistencies from which saints are not 
wholly free. 

IV. The matter having gone thus far, St. Cyprian turned to 



Digitized by 



—300 



WRITES TO ST. STEPHEN 



87 



Borne. He had done the same before. Even when the see 
was vacant he had written to the clergy who administered 
the affairs of the Church there in the following words ; 1 ' I 
have thought it necessary to write this letter to you wherein 
an account might be given you of my acts, discipline, and 
diligence.' Again, ' Nor in this did I lay down a law, 2 or 
rashly make myself its author. But ... I thought it 
right to abide by what was your opinion also, lest our conduct 
in the ministry, which ought to be united and to agree in all 
things, should in any respect differ.' 

Accordingly he now sends his report of the two synods, to- 
gether with his letters to Quintus and Jubaianus, to the Pope. 
The matter, he says, concerned their ' common honour/ i.e. 
the dignity of the priesthood and the privileges of the 
Christian name, 8 and accordingly it was especially needful 
that they should ' confer 9 with St. Stephen's ' weight and 
wisdom ' (vel maxime tibi scribendum et cum tua gravitate 
et sapientia conferendum). St. Cyprian and the bishops of 
the synod end with carefully defining their attitude towards 
their African colleagues, whose contrary practice had led to 
the question of the Numidian bishops and to the whole dis- 
cussion. They say that they know that these ' certain bishops 
are unwilling to lay aside what they have once adopted (or 
imbibed), nor will they readily change their practice, but will 
to retain certain ways of their own which have once come into 
use among them, keeping the bond of peace and concord with 
their colleagues. In which matter we put no force on anyone, 
nor do we lay down the law 4 (cf. Ep. xx.), since every prelate 
has the free use of his own will in the administration of his 
Church/ i.e. in this matter. We must emphasise the words 
1 in which matter/ 5 to save St. Cyprian from the grossest in- 
consistency as compared with his conduct in other matters. 

Such, then, was the state of things when St. Cyprian carried 

1 Ep. xx. B. xiv. * ' Nec in hoc legem dedi.' 

• That this is the meaning of the expression 4 pro communi honore 1 (§ 3) 
seems quite certain, from the use of the word 4 honores ' in § 2, and from the 
* honoramns ' in the sentence immediately preceding. It is translated • by 
reason of mutual respect ' in Prim. Saints, p. 74, in disregard of the context. 

4 1 Nec legem damns.' * Ep. lxxii. § 3. 




88 



ABOUT SOME AFRICAN BISHOPS. 



a.d. 96 



the matter to Rome, ' assured* (so he says to St. Stephen) 'that 
you, in virtue of the truth of your religion and faith [will] 
approve of things that are equally religious and true/ 1 

The point, then, on which St. Cyprian considered that St. 
Stephen ought to be consulted (conferendum) was one on 
which the African bishops refused to judge others or to use 
any force save that of persuasion, to bring them into line. 
It was not a matter of faith, and therefore it was one on which 
each bishop could use his own judgment in the administration 
of his diocese. There were bishops in Africa who did use 
their own judgment, and who refused to conform to what they 
considered a novelty. St. Cyprian accordingly used every 
effort short of force to persuade them that they were going as 
close to betraying the faith as it was possible to do without 
actually forfeiting the communion of their colleagues. These 
refractory bishops, as he deemed them, pleaded ancient custom 
on their side ; and St. Cyprian replied that his custom was 
not new — it was, in fact, about twenty years old in Africa — 
and that the discipline which he advocated corresponded to 
the 1 better things revealed/ of which the Apostle Paul had 
spoken as possible in the Church. As for those who had 
lived and died in the past having been baptised by heretics, 
and not rebaptised on their reconciliation to the Church, they 
must be left to the mercy of God. As for the succession of 
the episcopate from the Apostles — lost according to this theory 
— St. Cyprian did not enter upon that question. In fact, as 
St. Augustine says more than once, the question was one 
which had not been thoroughly sifted and elucidated. 

V. One more council, and that a still larger and more im- 
portant one, was now held at Carthage. The exact occasion 
of this council is a question of great difficulty. It is often 
thought to have been occasioned by the reception of St. 

1 I have given these words in full because (quite unaccountably, as it seems 
to me) they have been adduced as a proof that St. Cyprian could not have 
believed 4 the Pope to be the infallible monarch of the Church ' (Primitive 
Saints, pp. 76, 76). Surely to say that if you believe a thing to be true you 
believe it wtil be sanctioned by authority is not saying that that authority is 
fallible. If anything, your words would show the contrary. As a matter of 
fact, as will be shown later on, the question of infallibility, as defined by the 
Vatican decrees, does not come under discussion in this whole matter. 




—300 



HOLDS A THIRD COUNCIL, 



89 



Stephen's answer to the African bishops. But there is this 
(as it seems to me insuperable) difficulty in the way of con- 
sidering it to be an answer to St. Stephen's letter, viz. that 
the letter is not once mentioned. No parallel, I suppose, can 
be adduced to this save the refusal of Dioscorus at the Robber 
Council of Ephesus to read the Tome of St. Leo. But 
who would institute a parallel between our saint and that 
miserable archbishop ? Bishop Freppel thinks that it was a 
supreme act of homage to the Holy See that prevented St. 
Cyprian from discussing St. Stephen's letter in synod, when 
he disagreed with it. This seems to me highly improbable. 
St. Cyprian's holy passion for unity might arrest his vehe- 
ment opposition to the decision of St. Stephen at any moment ; 
and he might feel that he who had spoken of the See of Rome 
as 'the chair of Peter, and the principal Church, whence 
episcopal unity took its rise,' could not be the man to dissect 
and depreciate a decision of the successor of Peter in open 
synod, however he might tear it to pieces in writing to an 
individual like Pompeius. 1 But there are reasons why he 
could not have yet received that letter. 

For the difficulty is that, not only is there no mention of 
the letter of St. Stephen — the letters of Jubaianus to Cyprian, 
and of Cyprian to Jubaianus alone are said to have been read, 
and the letter of St. Cyprian to St. Stephen a — but the answers 
of the bishops and the words of St. Cyprian are not in the 
least what we should have expected had they met under the 
' irritation ' which St. Augustine attributes to Cyprian on the 
receipt of St. Stephen's letter. They speak of some ' amongst 
us ' upholding heretics and opposing Christians. And the 
whole record exactly fits in with the supposition that the oppo- 
sition of some African bishops had become so serious as to 
call for a fresh council on their account alone. 

Add to this, that St. Augustine nowhere supposes that 
these bishops in the third council are answering St. Stephen, 
and in places where many writers have seen an allusion to 
the Pope, he discerns none. He refutes every remark they 
make, and shows the fallacies in St. Cyprian's reasoning point 

1 Cf . Ep. ad Pompeium. 

* Cf. speech of Bishop Cresoens of Cirta, Mansi, t. i. p. 954 ; also St. 
Cyprian's speech, infra, p. 91, lines 26, 27, 28. 




90 



BEFORE HEARING FROM THE POPE, a.d. 9(5 



by point, but he nowhere understands that our saint's re- 
marks are aimed at the Pope. What things St. Cyprian did 
( pour out in irritation ' against St. Stephen in his letter to 
Pompeius, he does not 'rehandle* (retractare nolo), both 
because they lay on the dangerous border-land of harmful 
dissension, 1 and because they were the same in substance as 
the points he had already discussed. 2 The effusions of 
Cyprian under irritation were evidently confined, according to 
St. Augustine, to his letter to Pompeius. 3 

Once more, had the council been dealing with St. Stephen's 
letter, the bishops must have met the salient point of that letter 
more directly and more frequently. The point of St. Stephen's 
ruling was, as we shall see, connected with traditional custom; 
but only two of the bishops in the council deal with this point 
at all, and they only repeat words which had been uttered by 
St. Cyprian in his answer to the writer mentioned by Jubai- 
anus, and that answer was avowedly written before St. 
Stephen's letter reached Africa. 

The only supposition on which it can be maintained that 
this council was held after the reception of the papal decision 
and by reason of it, would be that St. Cyprian read it and 
showed it to none of the bishops, 4 and then called a council in 
which absolute silence was kept as to its existence ; or that all 
these bishops had seen it, but all agreed not to mention it, 
but to deal instead with the anonymous correspondent whose 
letter Jubaianus had forwarded to Cyprian. They must have 
decided to ignore the main contention of St. Stephen's letter, 
and simply assert their determination to adhere to their own 
judgments, without saying one word as to the position in 
which they found themselves, of separation from * the chair 
of Peter, the principal Church, whence episcopal unity took 
its rise,' and from those Eomans 'to whom,' according to 
St. Cyprian, 'faithlessness could have no access.' But 
what council ever met to discuss a proposal or decision from 
another part of the Church, without dealing directly with the 
terms of the decision in question? 

1 ' Periculum perniciosse dissensionis habuerunt ' (De BapU v. 25). 

* 4 Eadem quippe ipsa dicuntur, que jam satis disoussa sunt.' 

• Compare De Bapt. v. 26 with v. 23. 

4 Pompeius asked for a copy of it ; bat he was absent from the council. 




—300 



TO DEAL WITH THESE BISHOPS, 



91 



All, on the contrary, is perfectly clear on the supposition 
that the dissentient African bishops had shown their hands 
sufficiently to make it evident that they meant to adhere to 
the known custom of Eorae, even without having received any 
definitive sentence in their favour, and that this was the 
cause of the synod. St. Cyprian, probably, in his enthusiasm, 
and the conviction that he was right, counted, as indeed he 
says, 1 on Borne taking the same ground as he and the greater 
part of his colleagues in Africa had assumed, viz. that all 
should be left to go on with their old customs ; and thus he 
would be left free to bring the dissentients in Africa into har- 
mony with his own practice. He may have thought that 
Borne would even adopt the ' better way 9 which had been re- 
vealed, as he deposed, to himself and others. But, anyhow, 
he must have counted upon the question being left sufficiently 
open to leave him free to do his best to produce uniformity 
in his own province. We cannot suppose that he was de- 
liberately breaking the peace of the Church on a matter which 
he admitted to be amongst those on which a different line of 
action could be permitted. St. Augustine does, indeed, accuse 
him of unintentionally producing a rupture ; but that is quite 
a different matter. 2 

The Council, then, opened with reading the correspondence 
between Jubaianus and Cyprian, and the letter which the 
latter had written to St. Stephen in the name of his colleagues. 
St. Cyprian then made the opening speech, saying that they 
had met to discuss the question raised in the correspondence 
between himself and Jubaianus, which, we must remember, 
included a letter written to the latter, arraigning the policy of 
Cyprian. He says further that each bishop is to say what he 
thinks, judging no one, nor removing anyone from the right 
of communion, if he holds a different opinion. 3 

It is difficult not to feel that St. Cyprian might very 
naturally be accused of unduly pressing the whole matter, and 
of using his great position for the purpose. His position in 
the Latin world was second only to that of the Bishop of 
Borne. But his was not an apostolic, much less the Apostolic 
See. He could appeal to no divine institution in regard to his 

1 Ep. lxxii. 3. * De Bapt. 25. « Mansi, t. i. p. 953. 




92 



AND PROTESTS THAT HE 



a.t>. 96 



see. His relationship to his bishops was not that of the Bishop 
of Rome towards the episcopate. To assume such a relation- 
ship on the part of any one bishop to any other in those parts 
would be the assumption of a self-constituted relationship. 
They had no right to such a position. In issuing an edict, 
therefore, they wished to be careful not to act as Tertullian, 
St. Cyprian's master, had, in his fallen days, accused Zephy- 
rinus, the Pope, of doing, viz. ' I hear that an edict has been 
issued, and a peremptory one indeed, to wit, the Chief Pontiff, 
that is the bishop of bishops, proclaims, " I remit to those who 
have done penance the crimes," &c. ; this is read in the 
Church, and openly announced in the Church.' (' De Pudic/ 



They were not, says St. Cyprian, in Africa about to issue 
a general edict which would control the action of every other 
bishop. Although Cyprian was their Primate, he was not 
Pontifex Maximus of the Christian religion, and he did not 
mean to act as if he were. « For no one of us constitutes 
himself bishop of bishops, or drives his own colleagues to the 
accepting of obedience by the terrorising of a tyrant, since it is 
open to every bishop to form his own judgment, in the free 
use of his liberty and power, and he can no more be judged by 
another than he can judge another. But let us one and all 
look for the judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has 
the power by Himself both of setting us over (others) in the 
government of his Church, and of judging concerning our act.' 
St. Cyprian could not mean to say that a Marcian of Aries 
could not be judged by any bishop, nor a Privatus (cf. p. 67) 
be deposed from his see. He could not mean to put himself 
at 'variance with the whole practice of the Church in his 
own and after t imesjt What he disavowed was obviously either 
the exercise of authority on a matter which he considered to 
be merely one of variable discipline, or the use of his primacy 
in a tyrannical way. His words contain no judgment as to 
whether anyone had been divinely constituted bishop of 

1 Whilst there is an obvious reference to Tertollian's words, there is no 
necessary reference to St. Stephen. We often say * I will not act the Pope' 
without meaning to deny that there is someone who is entitled to act as Pope. 




—300 



IS NOT ACTING AS POPE. 



93 



bishops. They merely remind the African bishops that no 
one of themselves held such a relationship. 

4 What/ says St. Augustine, ' can be more mild ? What 
more humble ? ' And he elsewhere insists upon it that St. 
Cyprian meant what he said, and did not use these words of 
meekness merely to cajole 1 the bishops into speaking out their 
minds, with the view of afterwards bearing hardly upon 
them. No, the purpose of his speech was honestly to en- 
courage them to say what they really thought, in spite of 
their Primate's presence. St. Augustine compares with these 
words what St. Cyprian said to Jubaianus and to Magnus, and 
says that it is apparent from these just quoted that smaller 
things were dealt with on which there had been no clear * de- 
claration,' but which ' being still unlocked were being sought 
for with great effort.' He considers himself to be in a 
different position from Cyprian, 1 holding now the custom of 
the universal Church which is to be acknowledged on every 
side, and which has been confirmed by general councils. 

The council decided that the custom of rebaptising those 
who had been baptised by heretics was the better way. 2 

1 1 Securitate captaret • (De Bapt. vi. 7). 

' The Bollandist Life of Si. Cyprian (Fr. Suyskens, S. J.) takes the same 
Tiew of St. Cyprian's nse of the expression * Bishop of bishops.' 




CHAPTER VIII. 
bomb's decision and cyprian's irritation. 

I. There are no means of deciding how long an interval 
elapsed between the dispatch of the letter to Stephen 1 and the 
papal decision in reply. Neither have we the reply itself. The 
actual decision was, it would seem, contained in one short 
sentence. That single sentence, however, is evidence sufficient, 
and more than sufficient, to justify the esteem in which St. 
Stephen was held by all antiquity, and in particular the epithet 
which St. Vincent of Lerins applies to that Pope in recording 
this passage of Church history. * St. Stephen,' ho says, was 
a man * holy and prudent.' 

Let us suppose for a moment that St. Stephen had been 
carried away by respect for St. Cyprian's great name in the 
Church. A false principle as to the sacrament of baptism, 
nay, as to the nature of more than one sacrament, would have 
spread like wildfire throughout the Church. It was a very 
natural deduction from the truth of the unity of the Church, 
and from a high esteem of the privileges and gifts of the 
Church, to suppose that these could not be conferred even in 
any germinant way, or dormant character, by those who were 
outside the visible fold. But it was a false inference, for it in- 
volved a wrong answer to the question as to whether the 
sacrament in its process of bestowal was wholly Christ's, or in 
fact, the gift of the instrument. So that the matter, although 
a question of discipline, really bordered upon the vitals of the 
faith. It had, however, not yet been elucidated in all its 
bearings. The Church, as she passed along the stream of 
time, was discovering more and more the meaning of her 
deposit of truth. But she entered into the full significance of 
her treasures through the gradual settlement of difficulties as 



Cf . supra, p. 88. 




A.D. 96—300 THE POPE INSISTED 



95 



they emerged, one by one, and called for patient discussion and 
then final settlement. The fall meaning of the * character 9 
of the initial sacrament of the Christian covenant was now 
entering upon a further stage. But it could not be weighed 
under all circumstances ; and perchance the present were un- 
favourable to its calm investigation. There was no possibility 
of a general gathering of the Church's rulers ; at any rate a 
few months hence, even if the Pope had thought of a wider 
council, a new fiery persecution set in, during which he was 
destined to win the martyr's crown. 

What, then, did St. Stephen do? He laid down the 
ancient custom, and he forbade innovation upon it. He took 
the side of the dissentient African bishops. He indicated 
the dangerous nature of the new departure, and so far from 
allowing the practice, which had set in, to be one on which 
difference could be permitted, he thought that those who 
persisted in it must forfeit that ecclesiastical intercourse with 
the rest of the Christian Church which was the sign and seal 
of their being true to the one faith. ' Abstinendos putat,' 
said St. Cyprian—' he [Stephen] thinks they ought to be ex- 
communicated.' St. Stephen reminded St. Cyprian that he 
was the successor of that Peter, of whom he had written so 
well in his treatise on Unity, on whom our Lord built his 
Church ; that he occupied that chair of Peter of which St. 
Cyprian had once spoken so warmly, and was the head of 
that ' ruling Church whence sacerdotal unity took its rise.' 
He therefore put St. Cyprian on his obedience. He decided 
that : ' If any shall come to you from any heresy whatsoever, 
let there be no innovation but (let that be observed) which 
has been handed down — viz. that hands be laid on such in 
sign of penitence.' 1 

It will be noticed that in this decision the Pope avoided 
the language to which St. Cyprian demurs in his letter to 
Jubaianus. He does not say ' All, howsoever baptised ' — for 
that might be taken to include an alteration of the form of 
baptism — but ( whatsoever heresy.' The point in dispute was 
as to whether those outside the unity of the Church could 
baptise. The adjudication of St. Stephen was that they 



1 Cf. Jungmann, Diss. Hist. iv. 76. 




96 



ON THE ANCIENT CUSTOM. 



a.d. 96 



could, the use of the proper form being understood. So it 
was, as a matter of fact, always understood. 

Thus St. Stephen refused to enter upon the dogmatic 
portion of the dispute, but simply laid down the line to be 
followed in practice. He issued no ex cathedrd definition on 
the matter of faith, but directed the action of the Church. 
He decided that the new method of dealing with the baptism 
of heretics was closely allied to heretical notions concerning 
that sacrament, and therefore authoritatively forbade its 
continuance. He discountenanced St. Cyprian's programme 
of letting alone those who adopted a different method of dis- 
cipline. It was a matter on which the Church ought to be at 
one. So much so that he was obliged to tell our saint that 
he should no longer be able to hold communion with him if 
he persisted in his present course. 

As the successor of that Apostle on whom our Lord had 
built His Church, he felt compelled to insist on conformity 
in Africa to the custom followed in Rome, which, as St. 
Augustine more than once asserts, had come down from the 
Apostles themselves. 

There was one point of view from which St. Cyprian's 
action was less dangerous than if the truth had lain the other 
way. He was rebaptising those who did not need it. Had 
he been omitting to baptise some who needed it, the case 
would have been one for insisting on immediate obedience ; 
but as it was, he only did what involved no loss to others. 
This action, however, might lead to false views concerning 
the validity of the sacrament, and, indeed, was based on 
such false views ; and, as a matter of fact, part of St. Augus- 
tine's life had to be spent in refuting St. Cyprian's argu- 
ments, and wresting his authority from the lips of the 
Donatists. St. Augustine, however, was able to insist upon 
St. Cyprian's example as of more account than his unfor- 
tunate arguments against the validity of baptism by heretics. 
He would not break away from the Church. This was, to 
St. Augustine, the virtue of virtues in St. Cyprian's life. 
There was a stain in that life which he knew his glorious 
martyrdom had washed away ; 1 but there was one grand 

1 Ep. xoiu. 



Digitized by 



—300 



THE LEGATION TO ROME. 



97 



grace exhibited, the grace of charity which held him within 
the unity of the Church when he might have headed a 
schism, and had indeed every temptation to inaugurate an 
independent national Church. 

II. On receiving St. Stephen's decision, St. Cyprian seems 
to have immediately sent off legates to Rome with the hope 
of inducing the Pope to change his mind. But in vain. 
Nothing, indeed, could have been more inopportune than the 
appearance of these African bishops in the Eternal City just 
at that moment. The Pope was in the midst of trouble from 
the Novatians, and the Novatians had begun to rebaptise 
those whom they allured from the Catholic Church. These 
African bishops would find themselves at one with those 
pestilent heretics, and the great name of Cyprian would add 
to the confusion. St. Stephen determined that the Africans 
should not stay in Rome a single night. They were bidden 
to depart home at once. And judging from the number of 
events which crowd themselves into 1 these few months, they 
must have left Rome immediately. The matter was not one 
on which St. Stephen was prepared to receive a mission, and, 
if we may trust what Firmilian says on the subject, Catholics 
were forbidden to shelter the legates a single night. If, in- 
deed, as is almost certain, St. Stephen knew of the third 
Council of Carthage, held, as that was, either with the know- 
ledge of his decision or, as is more probable, in view of what 
they knew to be the practice at Rome, he was fully justified 
in taking decisive measures to prevent resistance spreading. 
Anyhow, he would not admit them to conference ; there was, 
indeed, no necessity, seeing that they did not come by ap- 
pointment. 

III. These African legates, therefore, returned home, and 
a messenger was immediately dispatched to the East. St. 
Cyprian knew that he had sympathisers there, and would 
fain take counsel with those who had already entered upon a 
somewhat similar career. He wrote and told Firmilian, the 
great Bishop of Csesarea, in Cappadocia, that St. Stephen — 
to quote the words he used to another bishop (Pompeius) — 

1 Gf. Dom. Maran. De Vita Cypriani, and Tillemont's admission that every- 
thing must have been done with the utmost speed, infra, p. 100. 



H 




98 



ST. CYPRIAN'S IRRITATION 



a.d. 96 



* thinks that priests of God, defending the truth of Christ 
and the unity of the Church, are to be excommunicated.' 
We may take it for granted that Firmilian had not been 
actually excommunicated, for it would have been contrary to 
all St. Cyprian's previous teaching to have sought help from 
him if he had. Let alone any deference to the See of Rome 
as the chair of Peter, she was on any view of the matter the 
mother-Church of Africa, so much so that St. Augustine ex- 
pressed his conviction that it was impossible to find an 
instance in which Eastern bishops communicated with African 
bishops except through Rome. But Firmilian was now, or at 
any rate had been but recently, engaged in the same dis- 
cussion, and accordingly St. Cyprian turned to him to see if 
together they could induce the Pope to reconsider his de- 
cision. Mere messages of sympathy would be out of the 
question with such earnest souls ; the question was, what 
was to be done ? 

But before we consider Firmilian's answer, it will be well 
to recollect the only indication of St. Cyprian's mind which 
we have from his own pen. He wrote about this time to a 
bishop, who was not present at the Council of Carthage, but 
who had asked to see St. Stephen's letter. St. Cyprian, judg- 
ing from the ending of his reply, sent him the decision of 
the council, at which we know from the Acts this bishop had 
himself voted by proxy, and at the same time poured out in 
the bitterness of his soul what he thought of the Pope's letter. 
St. Augustine, whilst refuting one or two statements of this 
letter of Cyprian's, refuses to go further, on the ground that 
he had already dealt with similar statements, and that it 
would be better to pass by the rest, as it had in it ' the danger 
of pernicious dissent.' One would gladly do the same, 1 but 
as the letter has been dragged into the question of St. Cyprian's 
allegiance to Rome, one is forced to produce its statements in 
some fulness. It must be premised that we do not possess 
St. Stephen's letter itself, and that St. Augustine, with all his 
great love for St. Cyprian, speaks of this letter as bearing the 
marks of irritation. 

1 St. Vincent of Lerins compares the Donatists' action in bringing forward 
St Cyprian so prominently in this matter to that of Ham towards his father. 




—300 



EXPRESSED TO POMPEIUS. 



99 



St. Cyprian then, in this letter to Pompeius, 1 speaks of St. 
Stephen's error as that of ' upholding the cause of heretics 
against Christians and against the Church of God ' — of things 
in the Pope's letter as * arrogant, beside the purpose, or self- 
contradictory/ i written without due instruction and caution.' 
He says that St. Stephen 1 communicating with the baptism 
of all has heaped up the sins of all in one mass into his own 
bosom,' and that he, ' forgetful of unity, adopts the deceitful 
defilements of a profane immersion.' After using arguments 
which St. Augustine has shown to be fallacious, he pursues his 
declaration against the Pope thus : « Does he give glory to 
God who communicates with the baptism of Marcion ? Does 
he give glory to God who judges that remission of sins is 
given by those who blaspheme God? . . . Does he give 
glory to God who, the friend of heretics and enemy to Chris- 
tians, thinks that priests of God, defending the truth of Christ 
and the unity of the Church, are to be excommunicated? 
... let us cast aside our arms, let us yield ourselves captives, 
let us deliver over to the devil the ordering of the Gospel, the 
appointments of Christ, the majesty of God: be the sacra- 
mental oaths of our divine warfare loosed, the ensigns of the 
heavenly camp abandoned ; let the Church bow down and 
give way to heretics, light to darkness, faith to faithlessness, 
hope to despair, reason to error, immortality to death, charity 
to hatred, truth to falsehood, Christ to Antichrist.' All this, 
and a great deal more, which he proceeds to describe with his 
own fervid eloquence, was to happen if the baptism by heretics 
was not disallowed. All this would happen if the practice 
followed on all sides in this country at this day, by every con- 
siderable religious body in existence, is to be countenanced ! 
We are all of us against Cyprian in this matter, and yet, ac- 
cording to Cyprian, ' if the fear of God abides with us, if 
regard to the faith prevail, if we keep the precepts of Christ, 
if we maintain the sanctity of His spouse incorrupt and in- 
violate, if the words of the Lord cleave to our thoughts and 
hearts/ <&c., we shall reverse our practice, and the Roman 



1 Ep. lxxiv. 



H 2 




100 



FIRMILIAN'S HASTY REPLY 



a.d. 96 



Catholic will rebaptise the Anglican, 1 and the Anglican will 
rebaptise the Eoman, and each will rebaptise the Wesleyan, 
and we shall generally deny to one another the name of 
Christian. 

IV. All this, however, is nothing compared with what Fir- 
milian poured forth in answer to St. Cyprian, Dr. Dollinger 
thus describes the two letters : — ' We are acquainted with the 
sentence of the Pontiff only through fragments which have 
been preserved by St. Cyprian and Firmilian : by the first in 
his severe and harsh letter to Pompeius, and by the second in 
his bitter and passionate answer to St. Stephen, addressed to 
St. Cyprian. Both endeavour to place the opinions of the 
Pope in the most unfavourable light.' 2 

It has been argued, with much force, by the Benedictine 
editor of St. Cyprian (Migne's edition), that the legates must 
have been sent to Borne after the second council held at Car- 
thage on the subject of baptism, because from this letter of 
Firmilian's we find that St. Cyprian's messengers were to 
return to Africa before the winter. If they left Africa after 
the third council, the legates would have had within a few 
months to journey to Borne, and thence back to St. Cyprian, 
and St. Cyprian's messenger (Bogatian) must have left Cap- 
padocia at once and returned to Africa before the winter had 
set in. Tillemont admits the difficulties of this supposition, 
but maintains that it was, nevertheless, possible. The Bol- 
landist writer of St. Cyprian's Life agrees with Tillemont, as 
also does Hefele. We have, indeed, only to suppose that the 
legates, as soon as they set foot in Borne, were told that their 
errand was a hopeless one, and induced to return at once, and 
that the deacon sent by Cyprian, on their return to Cappa- 
docia, was detained by Firmilian the shortest possible time 
consistent with the bishop being able to pat pen to paper and 
write oflf a reply. This will probably account for much of the 
peculiar character of that letter. Twice does Firmilian speak 
of being pressed for time. Bogatianus, the deacon, was wait- 
ing — * Your messenger was in haste to return to you, and the 

1 As a matter of fact, where the right matter and form has been certainly 
used, this is never done. 

* Geschichte, Periode I. § 29, p, 304 : 1 mit Bitterkeit and Leidensohaft.' 
Firmilian's letter is found amongst St. Cyprian's, Ep. lxxy. 




300 



TO ST. CYPRIAN 



101 



winter season was close at hand.' Firmilian must have read 
St. Cyprian's letter again and again with a certain feverish 
haste, and even (he says) ' committed it to memory/ He 
seems to have at length reached the boiling-point, and as the 
fire kindled, he poured forth a burning stream of indignant 
rhetoric against Stephen, which has hardly its equal in eccle- 
siastical literature for nervous eloquence, passionate indigna- 
tion, and bitter invective. 

He opens with expressing his joy at finding the blessing of 
concord with his correspondent, and says that for this experi- 
ence of unity with the African Primate he has to thank 
Stephen, although, he adds, the Pope has not thereby done a 
good work any more than did Judas, who was an instrument 
of the blessings of the Passion. After a beautiful passage on 
unity, he excuses himself for repeating the same things as 
Cyprian has said, whilst he adds some things by way of accu- 
mulating proof, and he regrets that he has been unable to 
consult his annual synod. 

He then attacks what St. Stephen is supposed to have 
said ; he denies that the Apostles could have admitted those 
who had been baptised by heretics without rebaptising them, 
because there were no sufficiently execrable heretics to bap- 
tise—a version of history of which St. Cyprian could not 
have approved. He then says that Stephen, unlike his pre- 
decessors in such matters as the observance of Easter, has now 
made the first * departure from the peace and unity of the 
Catholic Church . . . breaking this peace with you ... de- 
faming the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, as if they had 
handed this down'— the tradition is therefore human. He 
then protests against following heretics (as if St. Stephen 
meant this, when he quoted their custom to show the ancient 
tradition of the Church), and deposes that ' a heretic cannot 
lawfully' (he means validly, or else he misrepresents St. 
Stephen) * ordain, or lay on hands, neither can he baptise or 
do any spiritual act.' 

He then attacks St. Stephen for maintaining what he 
never did — viz. that remission of sins can follow from the 
baptism of heretics simply, 1 and scouts the idea that any 

1 The remission of sin followed upon conversion— the baptism then taking 
effect, and issuing in sanctification. 



Digitized by 



102 



PITEOUSLY MISINTERPRETS 



a.d. 96 



reasonable person would either maintain or believe ' that this 
mere invocation of the names would suffice for the remission 
of sins and the sanctification of baptism ' (showing that he 
missed the point of the Church's doctrine in the matter), and 
then gives an instance in which it would be absurd to suppose 
this. He next emphasises the unity of the Spouse of Christ, 
and says that ' the synagogue of heretics is not one with us, 
because neither is the spouse an adulteress and a harlot. 
Wherefore neither can she bring forth the sons of God, unless, 
indeed, as Stephen seems to think, heresy brings them forth 
and exposes them, but the Church takes them up when ex- 
posed, and nourishes as her own whom she did not bring 
forth.' His misunderstanding of the teaching of St. Stephen 
is here again complete. 

He then enters upon the subject of Apostolic Succession. 
' Christ said to Peter alone, " Whatsoever thou shalt bind," 
&c, and again in the Gospels, when Christ breathed on the 
Apostles only, saying, " Receive ye the Holy Ghost ; whosoever 
sins ye remit," &c. The power then of remitting sins was 
given to the Apostles and to the Churches which they, sent by 
Christ, established, and to the bishops who succeeded them by 
vicarious ordination.' And then follows a passage of supreme 
importance as regards the Petrine prerogatives of the Bishop 
of Rome. ' Herein,' says Firmilian, ' I am justly indignant 
at such open and manifest folly in Stephen, that he who thus 1 
boasts of the seat of his episcopate, and contends that he 
holds the succession from Peter, on whom the foundations of 
the Church were laid, introduces many other rocks, and esta- 
blishes new edifices of many Churches [i.e. admits the reality 
of many new Churches] whilst he defends, by his authority 
[the position] that baptism is there ' — amongst them. 4 For 
those who are baptised, without doubt, fill up the number of 
the Church.' 

One cannot but pause here to notice two things. First, 
the piteous misunderstanding of the teaching of St. Stephen 
into which Firmilian had fallen, which, nevertheless, has its 

1 * Thus ' (sic), not ' so,' as in Primitive Saints, p. 84. * So ' introduces the 
idea of excessive, unjustifiable boasting, which is not necessarily contained in 
the adverb ' thus/ 




-300 



THE POPE'S TEACHING, 



103 



bright side, for if 1 this had been the teaching of Rome, he 
would have been justified in opposing it. Secondly, the tre- 
mendous witness which Firmilian's words bear to the recog- 
nised position of the Bishop of Eome. Firmilian is not 
indignant that St. Stephen put forth with such prominence 
his position as the successor of Peter. He has no expressions 
of astonishment at this, as though it were a new claim. And 
yet it is inconceivable that he should not have exclaimed 
against the presumption of such a claim had it been unwar- 
ranted or new. No, Firmilian is only indignant that he, in 
the very moment and act in which he realises and places in 
prominence his relationship to Peter, should be making other 
rocks, by admitting the validity of heretical baptism. He 
goes on to argue that the successor of Peter himself ' in a 
manner effaces the truth of the Christian rock. 9 In fact 
he effaces himself. In this he is worse, says Firmilian, than 
the Jews. They had a ' zeal for God ; ' Stephen has none at 
the very moment when he (truly enough 2 ) proclaims that he 
occupies by succession the chair of Peter, ' for he concedes to 
them the greatest of all graces.' He might just as well go on 
' to join their assemblies and mingle his prayers with them 
and set up a common altar and sacrifice (§ 18). 

He then deals with the argument from custom, and says 
that the Jews clung to their old custom when Christ came, 
'disregarding the new way of truth.' Firmilian, like St. 
Cyprian, at one moment depreciates custom, at another claims 
it in his own behalf. 

And now his passionate indignation altogether gets the 
better of him. His words, beginning with the mention of Ste- 
phen in the third person, suddenly burst into an apostrophe : 
4 When thou communicatest with the baptism of heretics, 
what else dost thou but drink of their mire and mud, and, 
after having been cleansed with the sanctification of the 
Church, becomest defiled with the contagion of others' filth ? 

1 See p. 79 for the real state of the matter. 

* I have inserted these words mainly as a balance against the unjustifiable 
assumption made by some that Firmilian is condemning St. Stephen's claim. 
He does not say this : his words by themselves pass by the question of the 
justice of the claim, but they presuppose it. 




104 



AND EXAGGERATES 



A.D. 96 



. . . . Yea, thou art worse than all heretics . . . thou 
abettest their errors . . . and increasest the darkness of the 
night of heresy. And whereas they confess that they are in 
sin and have no grace, and therefore come to the Church, 
thou withdrawest from them the remission of sins which is 
given in baptism, in that thou say est that they have been 
already baptised and, outside the Church, have obtained the 
grace of the Church ' (again the same misunderstanding as to 
the teaching of Rome), 'nor dost thou consider that their 
souls will be required at your hand when the Day of Judg- 
ment shall come, who deniedst to those atheists the drink of 
the Church ; and to such as long to live thou wast the cause 
of death. And withal thou art indignant ! See with what 
ignorance 1 thou dost dare to blame those who contend for 
the truth against falsehood ; ... it is plain that the igno- 
rant are vehement and given to anger, whilst through poverty 
of counsel and argument they are easily moved to wrath, so 
that the Holy Scripture says of no one more than thee, " An 
excited man provokes 2 strifes, and an angry man heaps up 
sins " (Prov. xxix. 22). For what great strifes and dissensions 
hast thou provoked through the Churches of the whole world ! 
"What a great sin didst thou heap upon thyself when thou 
didst cut thyself off 3 from so many flocks! For thou hast 
cut thyself off. Do not deceive thyself, since he is truly 
schismatic who has made himself an apostate from the com- 
munion of ecclesiastical unity : for whilst thou dost think that 
all may be excommunicated from thee, thou hast excommu- 
nicated thyself alone from all. . . . What can be more lowly 
and meek than to have disagreed with so many bishops 
throughout the world, breaking peace with them each by 
varying kinds of discord — now with the Easterns (which we 
feel confident you [in Africa] are aware of), now with your- 
selves, who are in the South; from whom he received epi- 
scopal legates with patience and meekness enough, so that he 
did not even admit them to a hearing 4 — nay, further, so that, 

1 4 Imperitia.' * 4 Parat.' Some editions have 4 parit.' 

■ By taking the line of condemning the new practice — 4 dam enim putas 
omnes a te abstineri posse, solum te ab omnibus abstinuisti.' It is 4 posse.' It 
obviously refers, not to power in any, but in this, case. 

4 4 Sermonem colloquii communis.' 




—800 



THE SITUATION. 



105 



mindful of love and charity, he instructed the whole brother- 
hood not any one of them to receive them into his house, so 
that on their coming there, not only peace and communion, 
but roof and hospitality should be denied them ? This is to 
have kept the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, to cut 
himself off from the unity of charity, and to make himself in 
all things strange to the brethren, and to rebel against the 
sacrament and the faith with the fury of contumacious discord. 
With such an one, can there be one body and one spirit, with 
whom, perchance, there is not one soul, so slippery is it, so 
shifting, so uncertain ? ' 

Here at length Firmilian comes to anchor. He proposes 
to return to -the ' greater question.' But he can only re- 
strain himself for a few sentences. For he winds up with 
saying, 1 And yet Stephen is not ashamed to give support to 
such against the Church, and for the sake of upholding 
heretics to divide the brotherhood; nor, further, to call 
Cyprian a false Christ, a false Apostle, a deceitful worker. He 
[i.e. Stephen], conscious that all these marks are in himself, 
was beforehand, so as lyingly to object to another what he 
was himself deserving to be called.' 

This unique specimen of correspondence closes with using 
the plural, as though it were the opinion of several bishops. 1 

V. The question occurs as to how far this extraordinary 
letter, with its misinterpretations and obvious exaggerations, 
can be held to prove that St. Stephen issued a formal sen- 
tence of excommunication against St. Cyprian. 

It is necessary to repeat, 3 that excommunication is a wide 
term, including that suspension of ecclesiastical intercourse 
between various portions of the Church which did not mean 
that either of them considered the other to be in schism. If 

1 I have never been able to discover on what grounds the assertion is often 
made that St. Cyprian published this letter himself. The mere fact of its 
having been ultimately bound up in the collections of St Cyprian's letters 
proves nothing, for those collections were subsequent to his time. Indeed, 
the supposition that he translated it himself into Latin (we do not possess the 
original) is mere conjecture. Fr. Suyskens (S. J.), the author of the Bollandist 
Life, does not believe that he did. The matter has not received its final settle- 
ment. 

* P. 41. 



Digitized by 



106 



NOT SUFFICIENT EVIDENCE a.d. 96 



at any time during the strife between Borne and Africa, the 
question had been asked at Borne, ' Which is the legitimate 
Bishop of Carthage, Cyprian or Fortunatus?' there can be no 
doubt that the answer would have been, * There is only one 
Bishop of Carthage, and that is Cyprian.' It is necessary 
to mention this, because the Cyprianic struggle has been 
pressed into the service of a theory which regards communion 
with Borne as a matter of perfect indifference in determining 
the schismatic position of a religious body. 1 But it is one thing 
to be so separated from the chair of Peter as that another 
bishop could be placed by Borne in the same city as its true 
and legitimate bishop ; it is another thing to be only so far 
out of communion as that ecclesiastical intercourse is sus- 
pended. In these days of quick intercourse, when we can 
confer together by the flash of wire, or at any rate by the 
rapidity of the rail, the same state of things could not arise 
as in the times of Cyprian. It is the part of the inspector, in 
determining the alleged identity of a stream with a certain 
source, to examine into the elements of which the two are 
composed, and to decide upon the existence or non-existence 
of the same essential ingredients in each. So with the ques- 
tion of the identity alleged to exist between the Borne of to- 
day and the recognition of her position on the one hand, 
and on the other hand the Borne of St. Cyprian's time, and 
her relationship to the rest of the Church under the very 
dissimilar circumstances of the third century. Could the 
Church, as we observe her in action in that century, have 
developed into a heap of independent National Churches with 
no sort of intercourse without parting with principles then 
deemed essential ? The answer that has been given is, that 
* if St. Cyprian and St. Firmilian were really excommuni- 
cated, and if they nevertheless refused to alter either the 
teaching or the practice condemned by Borne, then it is clear 
that neither of these saints nor their colleagues in Africa and 
Asia Minor could have considered that communion with the 
Pope was an essential matter.' * In other words there can be 
independent National Churches. 



1 Cf. TJie Primitive Saints and the See of Rome, ch. ii. 
1 Ibid, p. 325. 




—300 



OF ACTUAL EXCOMMUNICATION 



107 



It is natural, in answer to this position, to ask why both 
St. Cyprian and Firmilian were so disturbed, if their com- 
munion with Borne was not essential ? 

But the full answer is, first, that the evidence for the ex- 
communication of St. Cyprian and Firmilian in the fullest 
seme of the term is not (to say the least) plain. Baronius 
and Manei think that the excommunication was carried out, 
but it is not clear what measure of separation they under- 
stand by the term. They have not, however, been followed 
by Catholic writers in general. Pagius, Natalis Alexander, 
the Bollandists, Hefele, Dollinger, Freppel and Jungmann, to 
mention no others, do not consider that the evidence at our 
disposal is sufficient to justify us in saying that the excom- 
munication was actually carried out. The only direct evidence 
is Finnilian's letter. But a letter so full of misrepresenta- 
tions, and of bitter invective, is (to say the least) not above 
suspicion as evidence on such a point. Firmilian made out 
that all the world was against St. Stephen : St. Augustine, 
with greater truth, spoke of Firmilian and his sympathisers 
as a handful compared with the bishops who held with 
Stephen. It would be in perfect keeping with the rest of the 
letter of Firmilian if, on learning from St. Cyprian that the 
Pope contemplated excommunicating those who persisted in 
maintaining their custom, he proceeded to picture the excom- 
munication as actual, and forthwith declared that this would 
be tantamount to cutting himself off, and leaving himself with- 
out any in the Church to symbolise with him ; only in his 
rhetorical and passionate way of speaking he said, ' By doing 
this, you have cut yourself off and stand alone.' Of course 
it was ridiculously untrue to say that St. Stephen had been 
disagreeing with so many bishops ' throughout the whole world, 
breaking peace with them severally in various modes of dis- 
cord ; ' but the expression need not be pressed, occurring as 
it does in such a letter, any more than the assertion that the 
Pope wished to excommunicate ' all ' should be pressed. 

And St. Dionysius' words referring to St. Stephen's pre- 
vious communication with Firmilian himself, viz. ' he wrote 
as not about to communicate with them either,' cannot fairly 
be pressed as necessarily meaning more than that he was not 




108 



ST. AUGUSTINE'S TESTIMONY 



A.D. 96 



going to communicate with them if tbey persisted in their 
own line. Certainly, Firmilian nowhere drops a hint that 
he and his colleagues were under actual excommunication. 
His wrath is reserved for the Pope's condemnation of St. 
Cyprian. He never says, ' We are in the same case : he has 
excommunicated us.' And yet it is inconceivable that he 
should not have said so, if it was the fact. Nor can it be 
successfully maintained that the case of Firmilian and his 
colleagues was on all fours with that of St. Cyprian and the 
African bishops, in the absence of all records on the subject. 
Although their case was the same in substance, it does not 
follow that it was the same in detail. The same sentence 
was passed on what they did ; but not necessarily the same 
on those who did it. 

On the other hand, St. Augustine's testimony is definite 
and emphatic, to the effect that the peace in all essentials 
was kept between St. Stephen and St. Cyprian. 1 This is the 
point of his argument against the Donatists, viz. that St. 
Cyprian was, indeed, wrong in his teaching, but that he kept 
in communion with the Pope. Again and again he lays stress 
on this. He enlarges upon it in some of the most beautiful 
passages of his many writings against the Donatists, who 
claimed St. Cyprian for their patron saint. Now it is not 
reasonable to suppose that St. Augustine was mistaken on 
this point. It was the tradition of the African Church on 
the subject. No Donatist replied that St. Augustine was mis- 
taken in his facts, as some one must have done, since it is 
not in one work alone that St. Augustine elaborates his point. 
So that the whole African Church in the following century 
was unaware of any such rupture having taken place between 
St. Stephen and St. Cyprian as is implied in the stricter sense 
of the term excommunication. It would be in vain to reply 
that St. Augustine had not seen Firmilian's letter ; for had 
complete excommunication taken place it must, apart from 
that letter, have left a sufficient impression on the African 

1 Lib. De Bapt. c. Donat. passim. In one passage St. Augustine notices the 
tremendous effect which a secession on the part of St. Cyprian would have had. 
4 If he had separated himself, how many would follow 1 What a name he would 
have made for himself amongst men ! . . . but he was not a " son of perdition " ' 
(lib. i. c. 18). 




—300 



THE OTHER WAY, 



109 



Church for St. Augustine to be unable to take it as certain 
that these two saints did not proceed to complete rupture. 

It is, however, most probable that St. Augustine had seen 
Firmilian's letter. He had no call to refer to it directly, for 
he was engaged in dealing with Cyprian's authority alone; 
and it is not possible that such a savage production would 
commend itself to his sweet and gentle disposition. But 
some words addressed to the Donatist Cresconius seem to 
imply that he was at least aware of its existence ; 1 and it is 
to the last degree improbable that, knowing its existence, he 
should not have been aware of its contents. This at least 
seems certain, viz. that the Donatists knew of its existence ; 
and yet, to judge from a later work of St. Augustine's, in 
which he repeats his argument from St. Cyprian's remaining 
in peace with St. Stephen, the Donatists did not feel that 
anything in Firmilian's letter justified them in objecting to 
St. Augustine's assertion that the peace remained practically 
unbroken between the Pope and St. Cyprian. In his third 
book against Cresconius, he says, ' Whatever you have thought 
ought to be brought in from the letters of Cyprian and 
those of certain Easterns, that they decided against the sacra- 
ment of baptism given amongst heretics and schismatics, in 
no way hinders our cause, if we keep to that Church which 
Cyprian did not desert, although many of his colleagues 
would not consent to this judgment ' (against the baptism of 
heretics). 

St, Augustine shows himself, in the following sections, 
thoroughly conversant with what the Easterns had written on 
the subject. 2 It is, therefore, but reasonable to conclude that 
he was fully aware of the contents of Firmilian's letter, indeed 
of the whole history of the matter. He speaks, indeed, of 

1 Dr. Posey, in his note to Lib. of the Fathers, Cyprian's Epistles, vol. ii., 
sayB that Firmilian's letter ' is probably alluded to by St. Augustine, C. Cresc. 
iiLl (as the Benedictine Edd. also think), "whatever," <&c., and Dc Unit. Bapt. 
e. PetU. c. 14. St. Augustine probably did not notice it further because the 
Donatists relied on the authority of St. Cyprian, not of an Eastern bishop ' 
p. 269). 

* He speaks of * letters,' not merely one letter, as is implied in Prim. Saints, 
p. 332, n. 6. The plural includes St. Cyprian's, but does not limit the Easterns 
to one. 




110 



THE LEGATES' DISMISSAL. 



a.d. 96 



some letters not having come into his possession, but that is 
not in reference to this particular branch of the subject. 

St. Augustine's evidence, therefore, to the effect that the 
rupture between St. Stephen and St. Cyprian was anything 
but complete (that it certainly did not include any actual 
excommunication), includes the evidence of the Donatists, and 
indeed gives the tradition of the African Church generally ; 
and his judgment seems to have been formed with a full 
knowledge of what took place between Firmilian and his col- 
leagues on the same subject. 

It may be asked whether Firmilian's statement about the 
episcopal legates is not to be taken as true, and whether, if 
it be true, it does not furnish a proof that St. Cyprian was 
excommunicated. 

To which it must be answered, first, that there would be 
nothing surprising if there were some exaggeration in Fir- 
milian's description of the legates' reception, considering the 
character of the letter as a whole. But, secondly, the recep- 
tion accorded to the legates, supposing that Firmilian's 
words are to be taken au pied de la lettre, would not prove ex- 
communication. On another occasion legates were sent away 
from Home (by Hormisdas the Pope), not, as was afterwards 
thought and stated, because they, or those from whom they 
came, were considered excommunicate, but because their 
presence there was certain to lead to trouble. What has hap- 
pened once may happen twice, and we have seen good reason 
for supposing that the presence in Rome of legates on so 
hopeless an errand as that of these African prelates was par- 
ticularly inopportune at that moment. So that all we can 
argue from their being sent back is that St. Stephen was not 
prepared to argue the question, but decided to deal with this 
Legatine mission most peremptorily. It would show St. 
Cyprian that he really meant what he said. St. Augustine's 
testimony to the preservation of peace in essential matters 
between Stephen and Cyprian, in spite of what he calls the 
* brotherly altercation,' in which Cyprian was unduly excited 
(comrrwtim), is of greater weight than the incident described 
by Firmilian. 1 

1 The student of history needs to be warned against Tillemont's article on 




—300 



QUITE POSSIBLE THAT 



111 



On the whole, then, there is, to say the least, not sufficient 
ground for asserting that things ever proceeded beyond a 
threat of excommunication. It is not necessary to accuse 
Firmilian of deliberate falsehood. There is a great difference 
between telling a falsehood and indulging in exaggeration. 
This latter Firmilian certainly did when he spoke of Stephen 
standing alone, and of the strife extending to the Churches of 
the 4 whole world ; ' and the statement of a writer who can 
call the Pope ' worse than all heretics,' when, as a matter of 
fact, that Pope was guarding an Apostolical tradition, is not 
a safe foundation on which to build a theory of Church go- 
vernment. 1 

VI. But, after all, the second clause of the sentence quoted 
above 2 is the more important, viz. ' if they [i.e. St. Cyprian 
and Firmilian] refused to alter either the teaching or the 
practice condemned at Borne.' 

This writer assumes that they did refuse. The historical 
record, so far as it goes, is all against him. St. Augustine 
expressly says that the Easterns altered their teaching. He 
blames the Donatists for separating themselves from them in 
consequence. 3 He says of the Easterns that ' they rescinded 
their judgment, by which they had decided that it was right 
to agree with Cyprian and that African council.' He then 
insists upon using the word 4 corrected ' in opposition to the 
Donatists : these Easterns (he says) ' corrected ' their judg- 
ment, although we know from the Council of Aries that some 
persisted in their erroneous custom. And St. Jerome tells us 

St Cyprian. He is by no means trustworthy. He says that St. Augustine 
would have changed his opinion if he had road Eusebius. Now, we know from 
St. Augustine himself that he had read Rufinus' paraphrase of Eusebius. And 
that translation or paraphrase is stronger on this point than Eusebius himself. 
Eusebius says only that Stephen * bore it very ill/ or was very much displeased 
with Cyprian's resistance. Bufinus says that Stephen thought that * neither 
were they to be communicated with who rebaptise.' St. Augustine did not 
consider that Rufous' heightened translation justified him in concluding an 
actual * excommunicato major.' Therefore Eusebius's milder term would not 
have led him to such a conclusion (Cf. Bolland. Series, Aug. 2, § 4). 

1 Mr. Puller's accusation (Prim, SS. p. 327) against the writer of these 
pages is based on a misrepresentation. Nothing is said about the, African 
legates in Authority— the passage quoted refers to Stephen's standing alone. 

* P. 106. • C. Cresc. lib. iu. cap. 3. 




112 



ST. CYPRIAN RETRACTED. 



a.d. 96 



that the African bishops themselves * issued a new decree.' 
They too corrected their judgments. What St, Cyprian him* 
self did, whether he led the way (as is probable) in the direc- 
tion of submission, the records do not say. 1 And it is in 
reference to this and not to the former incidents that St. 
Augustine speaks of some documents having perished. He 
thinks it ' suitable ' (i.e. reasonable) to suppose that St. 
Cyprian himself corrected his error ; but supposes that the 
records of this may have been destroyed by the Donatists. If 
he did not correct his error, then, says St. Augustine, there 
was his martyrdom, endured within the unity of the Church, 
which he had the grace not to leave ; and his suffering would 
have washed away whatever was faulty in his conduct in this 
matter. St. Augustine, with the most tender humility, says 
that he deemed it better to pass over those things which 
Cyprian poured out in irritation against Stephen (' ea prae- 
terire melius *). 2 

The whole matter is admirably summed up by a saint who 
has a special right to speak on such a subject. 

St. Vincent of Lerins, 3 the author of the golden rule that 
when there has been no authoritative decision on a subject of 
debate the faithful should see what has been held * by all, 
everywhere, and always,' writing in the next century, thus 
describes the part played by the Pope in this whole matter. 

1 St. Augustine distinctly says that St. Cyprian not only tolerated others, bat 
' was himself tolerated ' (et ipse toleratus est) (De Bapt. iv. 9). This most refer to 
a time subsequent to the third council. He also says that St. Cyprian 4 remained 
in unity with him ' — i.e. Stephen— which implies that there was reconciliation. 
St. Augustine thinks that St. Cyprian might easily have yielded even to * one 
uttering the truth » (i.e. Stephen), 4 which perhaps took place 1 (De BapU ii. 5). 

» St. Augustine considers only three solutions possible : (1) that Cyprian 
did not say all that he is quoted as having said, since the Donatists were fond 
of forging documents ; or (2) St. Cyprian • afterwards corrected this in unison 
with the rule of truth ; * or (3) his great perseverance (perseverantissime 
tenuit) in clinging to the unity of the Church covered this blot. Besides, he 
says 4 there is this, that, as a most fruitful bough, the Father purged away 
whatever there was in him to be blotted out by the sickle of his passion 
his * martyrdom* {Ep. xciii. ad Vincent.). 

9 There is something very surprising that a book which is entitled The 
Primitive Saints and the See of Rome should not contain one solitary reference 
to St. Vincent of Lerins, who has yet generally been considered (though 
wrongly) the patron saint of the Anglican theory of universal consent. 




—300 



ST. VINCENT OF LERINS' SUMMARY. 



113 



' When therefore they all from every side cried out against the 
novelty of the thing ' (i.e. rebaptising those who had received 
their baptism from heretics) ' and all the bishops all round 
began to resist it each according to his own zeal, then Pope 
Stephen, Prelate of the Apostolic See, together with his col- 
leagues, but beyond the rest, withstood [the novelty], thinking, 
as I presume, that it would be proper if he excelled all the 
rest in devotion of faith as much as he surpassed them in 
authority of place.' And * what then was the upshot of the 
whole business ? What but the usual and Qjistomary issue ? 
Antiquity was retained, novelty exploded.' 1 

This happy conclusion seems to have been reached under 
the successors of St. Stephen. 2 The contest was abruptly 
terminated by the storm of persecution which soon broke over 
the Church. In a few months* time St. Stephen won his 
martyr's crown. He has been reckoned a saint both by the 
East and West. 3 He is described as a ' holy and prudent 
man ' by St. Vincent of Lerins ; and St. Augustine was able 
to challenge the Donatists to find a flaw in his episcopate. 4 
Almighty God set His seal on his sanctity by permitting 
miraculous effects to follow from his remains, which now lie 
in the church of San Silvestro in Capite in the Eternal City, a 
church which has been granted for the special use of our 
Catholic fellow-countrymen. Of what passed during the first 
few months of the year in which St. Stephen attained to his 
. reward we have no record. 5 But we know that St. Cyprian 

1 Vine. Ler. Commonit. c. 9. 

* Mansi, however, who is appealed to as a kind of oracle in Prim. Saints, 
p. 328, considers it possible that this took place in St. Stephen's lifetime. He 
considers Natalis Alexander more cogent in this matter than would appear 
from the passage quoted by Mr. Puller. 

1 In the Greek Church he was invoked as a martyr on the same day 03 in 
the West, but also on the following day, or on Aug. 30 or Sept. 7. In a very 
ancient Constantinopolitan codex he is spoken of as ' the holy, sacred martyr 
Stephen, Pope of Borne.' His name occurs in the Menology of the Emperor 
Basil (cf. Boll. Ser. Aug. 2). It is to be regretted that the author of Tlie Primi- 
tive Saints and the See of Rome should have deprived of his erown one who 
wears it with such good credentials. 

' ' Episcopatum illibatum.' 

* Some writers consider that St. Dionysius' efforts for peace were then 
made and were successful. They must have been made under great difficulties, 
for the Bishop of Borne seems to have been under persecution for some months. 



I 




114 



THE POPE'S PART. 



a.d. 96 



was in full ecclesiastical intercourse with his successor ; and 
since both Eastern and African bishops dropped their novel 
custom and their resistance to the decision of Rome, we may 
assume that St. Cyprian did the same. 

VII. But why did not St. Stephen issue an ex cathedrd 
decision on the matter of faith, and so end the contest ? It 
will be better to discuss this question more at large when we 
come to consider the Council of Nicaea. Meanwhile it may be 
enough to reply that possibly St. Stephen did not feel that he 
had at his disposal those means to which the promise of 
divine ' assistance ' has been made according to the Vatican 
decree. Infallibility is not the power of stepping forward at 
any moment and settling a question ; it is only the security of 
divine * assistance 9 when the successor of St. Peter is led to 
define. He does not bear definitions within his head at all 
times, ready to flash out at a moment's notice ; their possi- 
bility and their materials lie in the circumstances of the 
Church. St. Stephen felt that his duty lay in securing the 
prevalence of the right practice ; in upholding the merciful 
view which he did ; in risking for this purpose the attachment 
of a great bishop, the Primate of Africa, to the unity of the 
Church. He probably knew that the attachment of a Cyprian 
to the Catholic Church would stand the strain, as it did ; and 
he could leave it for others to elucidate the difficult questions 
which had arisen, and which were solved by the general life 
of the Church. The great Archbishop of Alexandria, St. 
Dionysius, wrote to St. Stephen's successor for guidance on 
this very subject, alleging as his reason for writing his wish 
not to go wrong} He thus testified to the confidence which 
was felt in the guidance of the Holy See, which, indeed, had 
now piloted the Church through a storm more terrible than 
that of persecution. It secured a mode of discipline which 
nearly affected the very idea of a sacrament, and it left the 
full elucidation of the matter to the thought of the episcopate 
in general. Papal infallibility has its purposes in God's gra- 
cious mercy ; but it is not a dens ex machind under all circum- 
stances. The present Archbishop of Canterbury has noticed, 
and I fear I must say a little exaggerated, the odds against 



1 Eus. H. E. vii. 9. 




—300 



GENERAL SUMMARY. 



115 



which St. Stephen had to contend, and, whilst considering 
that Cyprian was not actually excommunicated, attributes the 
victory of Stephen to the justice of his cause. 1 But we may 
see more than that. His action must have unconsciously im- 
pressed upon the Church the trust that she could place in her 
God-given pilot. Not that she could have stated the infalli- 
bility of the Pope in the terms of the Vatican decree, but that 
her belief in it was there, amidst the mass of her convictions, 
mixed up with her general sense of the authority of the suc- 
cessor of Peter. It was not yet separated off and made to 
live before her consciousness in distinct and clear outline, for 
the Church does not live by theological definitions, however 
much she needs them in view of emergent error. St. Cyprian 
fought against a particular exercise of authority, not the 
authority in principle ; but for aught we know he ended by 
recognising the security of its shelter even in this matter. 
His can hardly be a test case, because history deserts us at 
the critical point. But we may believe that ere he won his 
crown he may have entered more fully into the meaning of 
our Lord's words, * I am with you all days,' as he contem- 
plated the faith of the Romans, and the power of ' the chair 
of Peter and the sovereign Church, whence episcopal unity 
took its rise,' to bind together the Church in unity of faith, 
even though it involved at times the severity of a father's 
love. 

Bishop Freppel thus sums the matter up from a con- 
troversial point of view. A discussion arises in Asia Minor 
and Africa on a point of discipline, in regard to which both of 
the parties equally appeal to ancient custom. The question is 
new, and touches, on the one hand, the notion of the Church ; 
on the other, the general theory of the sacraments. Two 
great bishops resolve it in an erroneous sense ; around them 
people adhere to their opinion; they possess the prestige of 
knowledge and sanctity. Further, it must be said, their solu- 
tion of the question has something in it to dazzle men's 
minds : at first sight it seems to safeguard Catholic unity, 
because it traces a deeper line of demarcation between heresies 
and the Church. Well, it needs only a few lines from the pen 



1 Diet, of Chr. Biogr. (Smith and Wace), art. 4 Cyprian.' 



i 2 




116 



GENERAL SUMMARY. 



A.D. 96—800 



of the Pope to overthrow all that scaffolding of texts and 
syllogisms. The partisans of innovation may resist as they 
please, write letter after letter, assemble councils ; five lines 
from the sovereign Pontiff will become the rule of conduct for 
the universal Church. Eastern and African bishops, all those 
who at first had rallied round the contrary opinion, will retrace 
their steps, and the whole Catholic world will follow the deci- 
sion of the Bishop of Borne. If there is in this an argument 
against the supremacy of the Pope, we can desire nothing 
better than that our opponents should discover many similar 
ones in their historical studies. 




CHAPTER IX. 



THE THREE SEES OF PETER. 



I. There is another incident in the life of the third cen- 
tury which gives us an important glimpse into the relationship 
that existed between Borne and the rest of the Church. It 
occurred at a time when the Bishop of Borne and the Bishop 
of Alexandria were of the same name — namely, Dionysius. 
They were both saints, and we are indebted to a third saint 
for an account of the correspondence that took place between 
them — namely, Saint Athanasius. 

But to understand the full bearing of the incident to which 
I allude, it will be necessary to bear in mind what we know of 
the relationship between Borne and Alexandria from other 
sources. 

Now, no one supposes that the Holy See could have often 
intervened directly, at such a period as the third century, in 
the affairs of the various provinces throughout the world. 
We know, indeed, from St. Jerome that in the next century 
its action was felt over the whole Christian Church in various 
ways. But considering the nature of intercommunication in 
those times this could only be occasional. What actually 
happened was as follows. 

The 'keys' were originally given to St. Peter, but the 
College of Apostles was presently associated with him — each 
one of them with immediate universal jurisdiction from our 
Lord, and each secure of divine assistance in promulgating 
the faith delivered to the Apostolic College, which consisted of 
Peter (their head) 'and the rest.' 1 Their infallibility was 
necessary for the function they had to perform, that of being 
the first founders of Christian Churches. It was not needed 



Acts ii. 37. 




118 



THE CENTRALISATION 



a.d. 96 



after this, and never claimed by their successors, with one 
exception — viz. the successor of St. Peter. They went out 
into the wide world and founded sees, without occupying 
them themselves. Being each of them confirmed in grace 
and infallible, the position of subordination which they 
occupied in regard to St. Peter was never emphasised as is 
the case where there is opposition or rebellion. They left to 
the Churches which they founded the deposit of truth which 
they bore with them from Jerusalem. They had no successors 
in their apostolate, in its fulness. The apostolate — which is 
of the essence of the government of the Church — lapsed at 
length in each case into the hands of one see, which remained 
for all time * the Apostolic See.' The rest of the Apostles 
were succeeded by bishops, and their sees, although apostolic 
in origin, were no longer apostolic in the full sense of the 
term, having no longer that immediate universal jurisdiction, 
and that infallibility in delivering the deposit, which was the 
peculiarity of the apostolate. They could thus be called 
apostolic, but in a subordinate sense, and they very soon 
ceased to be so called at all. The whole Christian world 
understood what was meant by ' the Apostolic See.' St. Vin- 
cent of Lerins, in a passage quoted above, does not think it 
necessary to do more, when speaking of Home, than to call it 
* the Apostolic See.' 

Whilst the Apostles, as a rule, left no successors of their 
universal jurisdiction and of their infallibility, there was one 
exception. It was not St. James, 1 whose see occupied at the 
Council of Nice a subordinate position. It was St. Peter, 
whose see was assumed at that council to possess the Primacy. 2 

That primacy was, in principle, as has already appeared, 
and as will appear still more plainly when we come to the 
Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon, all that it is now in the 
hands of Leo XIII. 

II. But in point of fact the bishops who immediately 
succeeded the Apostles, scattered as they were throughout the 

1 Hegesippus says of the first Bishops of Jerusalem : wpoiryourrcu wdcris l*- 
*Xi7<rfas i»s ftdfrrvpcs *al iwh yipovs rod nvplov (Eds. H.E. iii. 32). He is speaking 
of Palestine, not of the Church everywhere. 

* Cf. ch. xi. p. 168. 




—300 



OF THE CHURCH ROUND 



119 



world, enjoyed a certain measure of autonomy as a matter of 
necessity. It was owing to physical circumstances that they 
were in any measure externally separated, and not from any 
idea of the value of ' episcopal independence/ When Africa, 
in the next century, pleaded for a court of first instance of a 
more satisfactory nature, which would diminish their attend- 
ance at Borne, it was not with a view of cutting themselves 
off from Borne but of dealing with the witnesses themselves 
in the first instance, at first hand and on the spot. As a 
matter of fact the letter in which this matter is (if it is 
genuine) most urgently pleaded, was signed by a bishop who 
had at that very time lodged an appeal at Borne against his 
superior bishop ; so that he could not have been supporting 
episcopal independence of Borne. 

Such an idea is, indeed, foreign to the very idea of a 
kingdom, such as in those days they held the Church to be. 
And throughout the world, however autonomous, from the 
stress of circumstances, distant provinces might remain, 
intercommunication was kept up by epistola formata, or 
letters of communion, between all parts of the Body of Christ. 
To be outside the circle of Christian life embraced by these 
titera formata was equivalent to being no longer within the 
Christian Church. There was no idea of an underlying unity 
when there was external separation of a formal and final 
character. St. Cyprian expressly repudiates the idea. They 
knew of one Church, one only Church, numerically one— not 
many, separated one from the other, and never communicating 
at each other's altars. 1 

But when, through the withdrawal of the x^P l(r / m °' in- 
fallibility which the Apostles each enjoyed, any doubt arose 
in the Churches as to whether a bishop was handing on with 
accurate fidelity the deposit of truth communicated by the 
apostolic founder of a Church (or cluster of Churches), then 
St. Irenseus' rule came into force. The natural thing would 
be to compare the teaching with that of the nearest Apostolic 
Church, and finally, if need arose (or at once, if opportunity 

1 Communion might be temporarily suspended, as it was for thirty-five 
years during the Aoaoian schism, but in such cases it is clear that it was sus- 
pension, and not a perfected breach. 




120 



THE SEES OF PETER. 



a.d. 96 



occurred, or the occasion called for it) with the Church of 
Borne, with which it was necessary to agree, said St. Iren»us, 
ob potentiorem principalitatem, because of her more powerful 
principality. And as the lapse of time separated men from 
the days of the Apostles, they looked more and more to the 
permanent Apostle of the Christian Church, the one predestined 
seat of infallibility and universal jurisdiction. It required 
the fortunes of time to bring out the powers of her ' Apostle.' 
But such the occupant of the See of Borne was from the first 
— not as confirmed in grace, nor possessing inspiration, but as 
secured from error by special divine assistance under certain 
circumstances of his teaching. 

The amount, therefore, of intervention on the part of the 
Holy See in the affairs of the Church might be expected to 
increase with the growth of the means of intercommunication. 
Nothing in the history of the Church up to this hour has gone 
beyond the principle involved in St. Clement's letter to the 
Church at Corinth. But the principle has expressed itself 
more vividly and widely with the expansion of the Church. 
And the measure of autonomy forced upon the scattered com- 
munities of the early Church during the days of persecution 
would naturally give way to increasing centralisation, as the 
possibilities of exhibiting her law of unity multiplied. 

III. Meanwhile that external unity which is a note of the 
Church was being matured in the circles of Christian com- 
munities which were nearest to the centre of unity. The 
Bishop of Borne and his council of bishops formed the first 
and central knot. But from the first there was a wider circle, 
embracing a large portion of the East, distinctly gathered 
round this centre. Three great sees appear in the early 
Church, each of them counting St. Peter as the head of their 
catalogue of bishops. Each of them was a See of Peter, for 
at one (Antioch) St. Peter himself resided temporarily, and to 
the other (Alexandria) he had sent his disciple St. Mark, 
whilst he lived for a longer period, and died, at Borne. These 
two sees, therefore, occupied quite a unique position in Chris- 
tian history. In the language of St. Gregory they were, with 
the See of Bome, the three measures of meal which the 
woman took and leavened the whole. They appeared at 




—300 



APPEAL TO ROME 



121 



Nice with prerogatives which were left untouched, as being 
1 ancient.' Each of these sees occupied from a secular point 
of view a great central position, but each of them traced its 
real glory in the Christian covenant to its connection with 
the Prince of the Apostles. 

The Church, then, was not as many seem to imagine, all 
but invertebrate in that third century, but was already highly 
organised. There was no such thing as episcopal indepen- 
dence. The two commanding sees of Antioch and Alexandria, 
with their immense provinces of subordinate sees, as soon as 
they come into the full light of history, appear in a relation- 
ship of subordination to Borne. For instance, in the latter 
half of the third century Alexandria conducted herself on a 
most important occasion as in such a relationship, under the 
following circumstances. 

IV. The Sabellian heresy had sprung up in the region of 
Pentapolis, which, as we know from the 6th Nicene Canon, 
belonged to the ' Greater Metropolitanate ' (or, as it was after- 
wards called, * the Patriarchate ') of Alexandria. 

The Patriarch St. Dionysius had on a previous occasion 
written to Pope Xystus II. on the subject of rebaptism, 
giving as his reason for writing, ' that I may not err ' (Euseb. 
'Hist. Eccl.' vii. 9). He now wrote to Xystus' successor, 
named also Dionysius, to inform him of the fact that the 
Sabellian heresy had emerged under his rule. And at the 
Bame time he wrote to two of the Egyptian bishops. In his 
letters to these bishops he laid great stress on the reality of 
our Lord's humanity. This caused certain persons in the 
Province- not merely (as Canon Bright expresses it ] ) ' some 
Africans,' but ' brethren,' probably bishops 2 of the diocese 3 of 
Alexandria — to suspect him of leaning towards the Arian 
heresy. And in consequence the Arians afterwards quoted 
him as on their side. St. Athanasius, in a graphic account 
of the whole matter, indignantly repudiates the accusation 

1 4 The appeal or application to a Bishop of Borne on the part of some 
Africans/ &c. (Bright's Roman Claims tested by Antiquity, p. 9). 

2 It is ]jossible> but unlikely, that pure presbyters would thus appeal straight 
to Borne ; aScA^i is the word frequently used of bishops in the Athanasian 
literature. 

* In the early sense of that word. 




122 



FROM AFRICA. 



a.d. 96 



thus levelled against his saintly predecessor. He tells them 
in a magnificent letter exactly what happened. The offended 
' brethren ' (or bishops) in their zeal for orthodoxy reported 
their archbishop to the Bishop of Rome, who at once wrote a 
letter on the subject of Sabellianism and Arianism, adjusting 
the balance of truth which these opposite heresies variously 
disturbed. He also wrote to the Archbishop of Alexandria 
for him to explain 1 what exactly it was for which he was 
accused, on the ground that as the complainants not having 
explained it, he was in the dark. St. Dionysius, in no way 
resenting, but rather welcoming, the 'interference' of the 
Pope, at once sent a letter to His Holiness, saying that 
another was to follow, that the Pope might not think him 
dilatory in clearing himself from the accusation, however 
vague. His reply was sufficient. And St. Athanasius tells 
the Arians that they have only succeeded in forging a weapon 
against themselves in quoting St. Dionysius of Alexandria in 
their favour. * For they have brought two things into pro- 
minence : first, that Dionysius of Alexandria having cleared 
himself, they have him against them ; and secondly, the fact 
of Dionysius [the Pope] having written as he did against those 
who say that the Son of God is a creature, shows that not 
now [i.e. in the days of St. Athanasius] for the first time, but 
long ago (e/araXai) their heresy had been anathematised by all. 9 2 

Here, then, is the principle of appeal at work concerning 
an Archbishop of Alexandria to the Bishop of Borne ; here is 
another instance of the unvarying orthodoxy of the occupants 
of the Holy See ; and here, again, is an instance of how the 
Church was governed on the subject of the Homoousion long 
years before the Council of Nice. St. Dionysius the Pope, as 
supreme guardian of the faith, had ruled Arianism out of 
court long before that council had met. The Arian doctrine 
had, says St. Athanasius, been ' anathematised by all.' 

V. In the same century the relationship of Rome to the 
third Petrine See (that of Antioch) was emphasised through 

1 trikwrcu. Bishop Pearson's suggestion (3ijA.&toj) does not square with the 
course of events as narrated in the same paragraph. And there seems no 
motive for the suggestion except that it gets rid of an awkward fact. 

2 St. Athan. in Sententia Dionysii. 




—300 



APPEAL TO ROME 



123 



the obstinate resistance of its bishop to the ruling of no less 
than three synods. Paul of Samosata (so called from his 
birthplace) had denied the Divinity of our Lord and the per- 
sonality of the Logos. The Logos, according to this bishop's 
heretical teaching, was only the Divine wisdom infused into 
the man Jesus of Nazareth, who was therefore called the Son 
of God. His position as Bishop of Antioch and his great 
ability were sufficient to alarm and disturb the whole Eastern 
Church. The Bishops of Syria, Palestine, and Asia Minor 
assembled in synod in the year 264 and condemned his 
teaching. Paul promised amendment in some respects, in 
others he denied the charges. A second synod, however, had 
to meet in consequence of his continued heterodoxy, and then 
a third, and he was ultimately deposed and excommunicated. 
But he refused to give up the episcopal palace to Domnus his 
successor, and the bishops appealed to the emperor to enforce 
their decision. Aurelian, who was the emperor, decided that 
whoever received letters from the Bishops of Italy 1 and the 
Bishop of Borne must have the episcopal residence. Borne 
gave its letters to Domnus, and Paul was extruded. 

Now it may be said that it was very natural for the 
Emperor of Borne to exalt the Bishop of Borne, and if it were 
not for the historical context in which this method of solving 
a dispute between bishops occurred, one might easily, with 
Gibbon, set it down to a natural desire on the part of a 
heathen emperor to draw all matters, Christian as well as 
civil, to one centre. But not even a heathen emperor would 
try to appease a quarrel amongst Oriental bishops by a mode 
of action alien to their ideas of propriety, such as this would 
have been on any but the Papal theory. But the imperial 
settlement occurred in that same second century of the 
Church's life, 2 in which St. Victor had acted as one who had 
the right to determine the conditions of inherence in the 
common unity ; in which St. Irenseus said that all Churches 
must resort to, or agree with, the Church of Borne because of 
her more powerful principalship ; in which an emperor had 
expressed his fear of a bishop at Borne as of a rival to his 
own position of authority; in which the Bishop of Borne 

1 — the Papal Consistory : of. p. 124. 2 Counting from Pentecost. 




124 



FROM ANTIOCH. 



A.D. 96 



had temporarily settled the question of the rebaptisation of 
heretics, pending a general council, relying avowedly on his 
succession to Peter ; the century in which another Bishop of 
Borne had received an appeal against the Bishop of Alex- 
andria, and the latter had proceeded at once to clear himself 
from the charge of heresy— all these witnessing to a general 
conviction on the part of bishops and Popes that the * chair 
of Peter ' was the normal centre of the Christian Church, and 
making it natural for an emperor who wished to see peace 
restored, to refer the matter to the Pope and his council as 
the recognised arbiter of Christian disputes. 

The emperor was just then at Antioch, after his victory 
over Zenobia, and seventy bishops had decided against the 
Patriarch Paul. It would therefore have been natural for the 
emperor to settle the matter at once in favour of Domnus, 
had he not seen that it could be settled by a higher eccle- 
siastical authority in accordance with the rules of the Christian 
community. It is reasonable to suppose that either the 
bishops at Antioch themselves suggested the reference to 
Borne as the final court, as Ballerini suggests, or, as the 
Gallican Fleury supposes, that ' it was sufficiently notorious 
even to the heathen that the true religion of the Christian 
body lay in communion with the Boman Church/ 1 The judg- 
ments of Borne were invariably passed in synod — in a synod 
not of all the Italian bishops, but of a select number, varying 
according to circumstance. They were the normal organ of 
Papal decisions. To this synod the emperor had the matter 
referred, 2 for, says Bossuet, he had noticed that the Christian 
body was contained within the communion of the Boman 
Bishop. 3 Accordingly Eusebius praises the action of the 
emperor as * most religious.' 4 

Thus in those primitive days no idea of the independence 
of national Churches seems to have entered the mind of the 
Christian community. The whole Church was one vast 

1 Hist. torn. ii. lib. 8, o. 8. 

* Throughout the whole history of the Church up to this day the Popes 
have been accustomed to act in concert with some kind of consistory. 

■ Discours sur VHist. univ. 

4 Eus. H. E. vii. 30 : alaiwrara rov rpaxriov Ziukr\<pt. 




—300 THE JEWISH ORGANISATION 



125 



brotherhood, with its relations of interdependence between 
the various centres or sees. And all tended upwards to one 
common centre, which appeared as such, as the need of a 
central authority made itself felt, and the possibilities of its 
exerting its influence increased. Rome, Alexandria, and 
Antioch gradually emerge as three distinct and greater 
centres ; whilst between themselves an order is observed which 
places each of these Eastern sees in a relation of subordination 
to the West, that is the See of the one Eternal City, destined 
to be such by virtue of her relationship to the Prince of the 
Apostles. 

VI. And if we ask why Alexandria took precedence of 
Antioch, the answer is to be found, not merely in its civil 
position, but in the law originally laid down by our Lord in 
sending His Apostles through the world. They were to go 
first to the Jews. Accordingly they went first to those cities 
in which the greater number of Jews resided, making them 
the centre of their operations. Thus the extension of the 
Church followed the framework of the Jewish organisation, 
rather than, as some appear to imagine, 1 merely the civil 
order. As the Jewish Sanhedrim in Palestine received their 
jurisdiction from the central bureau at Jerusalem, so the 
Christian communities, composed of Jewish converts, so long 
as they continued to be so composed, owned Jerusalem as 
their metropolis ; but when, as Dr. Dollinger has pointed out 
in his admirable summary of the growth of the metropolitical 
system, these Churches were destroyed under Adrian, and a 
new Church, composed mainly of converts from paganism, was 
formed at iElia, the metropolitical jurisdiction in Palestine 
was transferred to Caesarea, whose Church took precedence of 
iElia owing to its apostolical foundation. It had been founded 
by St. Peter in the conversion of Cornelius, the first Pagan 
who embraced Christianity. 2 

The same principle explains the order of Alexandria in 
the gradation of sees. St. Peter sent his disciple St. Mark 

1 Ejg. Mr. Poller, in his Primitive Saints, dc. p. 18 seq., and the Bishop 
of Lincoln in his preface, p. xv. 

* Pdllinger's Hist, of the Church, Period I. ch. iil. § 8. See the whole 
section. 




126 



FOLLOWED BY THE CHURCH. 



a.d. 96 



thither, and was thus held to have been its real founder. It was 
the largest centre of Jews outside Judaea ; its ethnarch took 
precedence of all other heads of the Jewish people in their 
dispersion, and consequently it took precedence even of 
Antioch, also a Petrine see. 1 And its metropolitical jurisdic- 
tion, confirmed by the Nicene fathers as having existed from 
the beginning, covered, not the political, but the Jewish divi- 
sion. The Bishop of Alexandria held sway over the Pentapolis 
and Libya, which politically belonged to the African, not to 
the Egyptian province. The area of his jurisdiction was thus 
conterminous with that of the Jewish ethnarch, not of the 
imperial prefect or proconsul. 2 Borne was the centre of 
Jewish life in the West, and in Borne St. Peter abode, with 
intervals of absence, for twenty-five years, and thither came 
also the great Apostle of the Gentiles, whose name was to be 
for ever linked with that of St. Peter in the prayers and 
thoughts of the Christian world, in regard to the Eternal City. 
As a matter of fact the centres of Jewish life were also the 
centres of political grandeur ; and it was, we may say, in the 
providence of God that on the division of the Boman Empire 
the constitution of the Church rarely crossed or overlapped 
the articulation of the civil order. But in principle it might 
on any occasion, as it actually did in the case of Basilinopolis 
at the Council of Chalcedon. Ordinarily, however, the poli- 
tical centre would naturally form the ecclesiastical metropolis, 
as there could be no fresh Apostolical foundation. Eventually 
no Apostolical see presented a permanent and uninterrupted 
succession, save only the See of St. Peter. Alexandria and 
Antioch were destined to be submerged in the troubles of the 
Church, and to-day Borne alone of all sees in the world can 
trace her line of descent straight up to an Apostle. 

1 So St. Ambrose, when insisting on the truth that it is the Holy Spirit 
who cleanses the soul, the Church being His instrument, runs through the sees 
in order, * It was not Damasus ' (Bishop of Rome) ' that cleansed, it was not 
Peter ' (Bishop of Alexandria), * it was not Ambrose ' (Bishop of Milan), 4 it was 
not Gregory ' (Bishop of Constantinople). He omits Antioch because of its 
trouble about its bishops (De Spir. Sancto, lib. i. n. 18). 

3 Mr. Puller (Prim. SS. p. 14 seq.) does not seem to have realised this : 
hence the undue stress which he has laid on the civil position of these sees. 
One does not see on what grounds, according to his theory, Canterbury takes 
precedence of London. 




—300 



THE WITNESS OF THE POPES. 



127 



The Witness of the Popes concerning their Office. 

But before going further it will be well to consider an 
argument which has been much insisted on of late. It has 
been said on behalf of the Anglican position : ' Our contention 
is that the idea of a divinely appointed supremacy over the 
whole Church, as a prerogative of the Koman See, arose very 
largely out of the exorbitant claims made by the Popes. It 
follows that exaggerated 1 claims in favour of the Papacy, when 
they occur in the writings of the Popes or of other persons 
living, so to speak, in a Papal atmosphere, and when they 
stand in marked contrast with the general teaching of the 
Fathers and Doctors of the Church, cannot be quoted, at any 
rate controversially, on the Papal side. We regard them as 
the proofs of Papal ambition. In connection with this subject 
it is surely permissible to refer in all reverence to our Lord's 
own words, " If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not 
true " (St. John v. 81).' 2 And again, ' No candid person will 
press statements about St. Peter written by Roman Popes or 
by Antiochene Fathers.' 3 

It will be well, before proceeding to consider the witness 
of the fourth century, to examine the value of the above state- 
ment. And I shall begin with the passage quoted from Holy 
Scripture. 

Our Blessed Lord had been bearing witness concerning 
Himself. He had called Himself the Son of God; He had 
said that He was about to raise the dead, and to judge the 
whole of the human race. Those who saw in the tone of 
authority with which He spake an evidence of the truth which 
He delivered were amongst the very elect of God. But, 
although what He said was strictly true, He vouchsafed to 
add another testimony to His own, and so to make His 
witness to Himself complete and formally true, according to 
the received notions of legal testimony. He accordingly 

1 Mr. Puller explains what he means by exaggerated claims in the opening of 
his Preface (p. xxvi), viz. * the claim to a supremacy or primacy of jurisdiction 
as of divine right.' 

3 Primitive Saints, <tc. p. 97, note 3. 1 Ibid. p. 123. 




128 



OUR LORD'S WITNESS. 



A.D. 96 



referred them to the witness of the Baptist, who, as an 
acknowledged prophet, was to them an accredited witness, 
summing up the testimony of the Jewish teaching Church. 
The Baptist had borne the same witness by the river Jordan 
as our Lord had now borne concerning Himself. 

Our Lord, therefore, rested His claim to their acceptance 
on two grounds, His own witness and that of the Baptist, the 
two together satisfying the formal requirements of their Law. 
To His own it was enough that He ' spake with authority ' in 
a way that none had ever done, touching chords of their 
hearts which no power had been able thus to sweep with the 
hand of a master, proclaiming Himself the real author of their 
inmost being. St. Peter, when our Lord appealed to the 
twelve as to whether they would leave Him, replied at once, 
' Lord, to whom shall we go ? Thou hast the words of eternal 
life.' 1 There was a richness, a fulness, in His teaching that 
met the imperious needs of their souls as no other teaching 
ever had. To them it was a felt truth that, as our Lord 
afterwards said, 'Although I give testimony of myself, my 
testimony is true.' 2 

Now the Church is the extension of the Incarnation, and 
as our Lord was in the world, so is she. The same feature 
that strikes us in the teaching of our Lord meets us in the 
teaching of His Church. She speaks with the tone of authority ; 
she bears witness of herself. And as there is no logical alter- 
native between considering that either our Lord (may He 
forgive the words) uttered blasphemy when He bore the 
witness that He did to Himself, or that He was what He said 
He was, literally and fully Almighty God, so is it with His 
Church, and so is it with those who represent His Church 
from age to age. As the late Dr. Liddon, in one of the most 
remarkable sermons that this century has produced, 8 drew out 
the proposition that our Lord could not be a sincere man — 
could not be considered a good man — if He was not Almighty 
God, seeing what He said of Himself, so is it true to say 
that no Pope who gave himself out as supreme ruler of the 

1 St. John vi. 69. * St. John viii. 14. 

* Bampton Lectures on the Divinity of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 
Leot. iv. 




—300 



THE WITNESS OF THE POPES 



129 



Catholic Church, or acted as such, could be a good man 
unless the claim was just, since he must have taken the name 
of God in vain with his eyes open, of set purpose, in the 
supreme acts of his sacerdotal life. On the other hand, if 
St. Peter was appointed by our Lord to be head of the 
Apostles, and if each Pope in succession felt himself to be the 
successor of that Apostle, then it became a mere duty to bear 
witness to his office, and no sin could be greater than for such 
a one to make acts of humility at the expense of divine truth. 
If he should hide the truth, if he failed, when occasion de- 
manded it, to ' magnify his office/ 1 he must hear the con- 
demnation of the Divine Head of the Church, 1 0 thou wicked 
and slothful servant.' 2 

Much, therefore, will depend on the circumstances under 
which the Popes bore witness to their office. The position 
maintained in this book is that the witness they bore was of 
such a character, and under such circumstances, as to render 
it of great value. And it seems to me altogether unphiloso- 
phical, and that is the same as saying that it is in violation 
of the laws of historical investigation, simply to set aside 
their witness as nothing worth. They are quoted in this 
work for what they are worth. Their witness is not valueless 
because borne by themselves, neither is it conclusive unless 
supported by other testimony. 

Now consider the character of the witness borne in this 
third century. It is unvarying. And it has after it an un- 
varying testimony of sixteen hundred years. It is not, there- 
fore, the witness of one man, but of many, and of men placed 
in a post, according to their own judgment, of the highest 
responsibility. How is it that Pope after Pope no sooner sits 
on the throne than he is filled with the same consciousness 
of world-wide responsibilities ? What was there in that one 
See that spread the infection to each successive occupant, so 
that he articulated with such perfect simplicity the same 
teaching concerning his relationship to the rest of the Church ? 
Is there any sign of ambition, except in the mere fact that 
each Pope acted as Ruler of the Universal Church, to plead 
which against hem in controversy would be to beg the ques- 

1 2 Cor. x. xi. xii. * St. Matt. xxv. 26. 

K 



Digitized by 



130 



IS SUCH AS TO DEMAND 



a.d. 96 



tion ? Why is it, in the judgment of such writers as I have 
quoted, always ambition on the one side, and not rather 
rebellion on the other ? 

Let us look at the circumstances under which the claim 
comes to view. It was in the ages of persecution. In the 
second century the violation of the laws proscribing Christian 
worship and the Christian society was often connived at 
officially, but the laws existed in all their tremendous severity, 
ready at any moment to be put in execution. Wherever the 
Christian society existed, it lived under the vigilant obser- 
vance of a sleepless foe, and, of all things, the imperial power 
dreaded its centralisation. 1 St. Peter had suppressed the 
name of Eome in his Epistle, calling it Babylon ; St. Clement 
suppressed his own in writing to Corinth. Each of them 
wrote under violent persecution. 2 But they wrote. And the 
Bishops of Borne not merely wrote, but they acted as the 
rulers of the Church under circumstances which rendered any 
exhibition of a centralising power a matter of almost certain 
death. During this time the Church of Borne acquired a 
name throughout the Church for practical goodness, and for 
steadfastness of faith ; so that the clergy of Borne in writing 
to St. Cyprian could assume that the Apostle's commendation 
of their Church was understood to apply to all time. 8 And 
St. Cyprian does not hesitate to speak of the Bomans as those 
' to whom faithlessness could have no access.' 4 Are we to 
suppose that their bishops, chosen as men whom they could 
trust to lead them, were in each case tainted with the dia- 
bolical sin of ambition ? They were mostly martyrs, and they 
all had of necessity the martyr's end before their eyes. In 
that stormy third century, which passed in alternations of 
extreme tolerance and passionate persecution, no Pope sat on 
the throne with any fair prospect of dying the common death 
of ordinary men. St. Zephyrinus reigned during the persecu- 
tion under Severus ; St. Callistus was imprisoned, half starved, 
severely beaten day after day, finally thrown into a well, and 

1 See this beautifully developed in Mr. Allies' Throne of the Fisherman, 
c. vi. 

* St. Clement in a short breathing. time between two persecutions. 

• Of. supra, p. 53. 4 Supra, p. 5 ( J. 




—300 



A RESPECTFUL HEARING. 



131 



80 won his crown; St. Urban fell a victim to the sensual 
monster Heliogabalus ; St. Pontian was exiled ; St. Anterus 
died in the persecution of Maximin ; St. Fabian suffered 
under Decius, and the Christians were unable to elect his 
successor for two years, so fierce was the persecution. At 
length Cornelius, of a noble Roman family, occupied the see 
for little more than a year, and died in exile. St. Lucius, 
who succeeded him, was presently banished, and received the 
well-known letter from St. Cyprian congratulating him on 
possessing the twofold honour of the bishopric and of suffering 
for the faith. After a short reign St. Stephen held the post 
for four years, and ended with a violent death, whilst his 
successor St. Sixtus was seized as he offered the Holy Sacrifice 
in the catacomb, and beheaded in his episcopal chair. Truly 
in that first half of the third century the See of Peter was 
baptised in blood. One bishop now died in peace — St. Dio- 
nysius, but the roll of confessors recommenced in St. Felix, 
who died in prison, and in St. Caius ; and the white-robed 
army of martyrs received another recruit in St. MarceUinus, 
with whom this blood-red century closed. For three years 
the see was vacant owing to the violence of the persecution. 

Now, five times in this century, amongst the scanty 
records, the Pope comes out to view as ruler of more than 
the local Church of Rome. In each case his action is drawn 
from him by dangers threatening the faith of the Church. 
The Holy Feast of Easter, the Queen of Festivals, was in 
danger of being associated with false teaching. St. Victor 
attempted to produce a uniformity of practice in its observ- 
ance, in which he was thwarted by one portion of the Church, 
though supported by the greater whole. St. Irenaeus prevailed 
upon him not to use his authority further. During the fierce 
persecution under Severus many Christians lapsed, and some 
would have closed the door of repentance to such for ever. St. 
Zephyrinus came forth and opened the gate of mercy, as th( 
High Priest of the Christian religion. So Tertullian described 
him. Under St. Stephen the African Primate had started 
on a dangerous career, and might have carried all before him 
in a practice which must have ended in depraving the doctrine 
of the Sacraments. Whole provinces were exposed to th< 



Digitized by 



Google 




132 



THEIR AUTHORITY RESISTED, 



A.D. 96 



danger of being carried away with the novelty, when the Pope 
stepped forth and put a stop to the danger, acting avowedly 
on his position as successor of Peter. The vigilance of St. 
Dionysius the Pope, so praised by St. Athanasius, was exercised 
towards the saintly Dionysius of Alexandria, in view of possible 
dangers to the cardinal point of the faith, whilst St. Felix 
achieved the peace of the Church by deposing the Bishop of 
Antioch. 

There is no room for the accusation of ambition in all 
this. In each case it was care for the faith. 

The only answer usually given to the various evidences of a 
supremacy having been accorded to the See of Home in this 
century, is that in the most marked instances there was resist- 
ance, and that the authority recognised in the Bishop of Borne 
was only a tribute to the imperial position of the city. 

But as regards the latter, it is at any rate not this that 
comes to the front in the record. The central position of the 
See of Rome is, according to St. Irenaeus, due to her principal- 
ship as compared with other Churches, which we have seen 
cannot mean her secular position. Her priceless prerogative 
is, according to Tertullian, that she possesses ' all doctrine ; * 
her peculiarity, according to St. Cyprian, is that she is in a 
unique sense ' the chair of Peter ' and the original source of 
episcopal unity. St. Clement claims to be heard not by 
reason of the natural position of his city, but on supernatural 
grounds ; whilst St. Stephen speaks of himself as the successor 
of Peter, which neither St. Firmilian nor St. Cyprian deny. 

And as regards the resistance offered to these early Popes, 
to what does it amount ? In each case the Pope proved to be 
in the right ; his judgment was always followed in the event 
by the whole Church. St. Victor's ruling as to the Easter 
Festival became the ruling of the whole Church ; St. Stephen's 
likewise ; so with that of St. Zephyrinus or St. Callistus. St. 
Dionysius' judgment is quoted by St. Athanasius as the con- 
demnation of Arianism, and St. Clement's brief was at once 
obeyed. Never once, no, not in any one single line in the 
record we possess, is the one word found, which was needed 
on the theory of those who defend separation from Rome 
— ' You have no such authority in matters of faith.' St. 




—300 



BUT NOT DENIED. 



133 



Cyprian contended that the matter of rebaptisation did not 
come under that head ; St. Victor did not pretend that the 
Asiatics were directly opposing the faith. 1 Thus the resist- 
ance, such as it was, on the other hand, will not bear the 
weight of argument placed upon it. 

And yet the exhibition of authority is at once wide in its 
range and consecutive in its action. The truth as to the 
Christian ministry is defended by St. Clement; Gnosticism 
is condemned in two of its chief leaders (Cerdon and 
Valentine) by St. Hyginus; the heresies of Valentine and 
Marcion by St. Pius. Valentinianism, asserting itself under 
St. Eleutherus, found in that Pope its active opponent. It 
was his successor, St. Victor, who was the first, according to 
Eusebius, to excommunicate the forerunner of Arius, viz. 
Theodotus, ' the leader and father of this God-denying apo- 
stasy, the first one that asserted that Christ was a mere man.' 2 
The dangers that beset the faith in regard to the Festival of 
the Resurrection were, as we have seen, met by the same Pope, 
and those that assailed the Sacrament of Penance and the 
mercies of its provisions, by his successor, St. Zephyrinus. 
The restriction which an unchristian severity placed on the 
restoration of those who lapsed under persecution were dis- 
countenanced by St. Cornelius, and the denial of the validity 
of the heretics' baptism was condemned by St. Stephen. St. 
Dionysius, as I have said, anticipated the Council of Nice in 
the condemnation of what afterwards went by the name of 
Arianism, and the letter of St. Felix to the Bishop of Alex- 
andria concerning Paul of Samosata, the heretical Bishop of 
Antioch, is extant to prove him worthy to take his place in 
this illustrious line of guardians of the Church's faith. 

Thus far, then, the See of Borne is prominent, but not in 
the way of ambition. No see could show such a line of 
martyrs; no see could produce such a record of active 
guardianship of the divine deposit which had been committed 
to the Church's care. At the same time the way in which she 
assisted others in their distress by her munificent and unfailing 

1 ohn lp6o&olourra% (Eng. H. B. v. 24) does not amount to more than tha 
they were wrong on the particular point, which was not a matter of faith. 
* Eus. H. E. v. 28. 




134 



THE WITNESS OF SUCH 



A.D. 96 



almsgiving was such as to lead some, like the late Dr. Light- 
foot, to assign her great position in the Church universal, 
what he calls her ' leadership,' to her ' practical goodness/ 
But in truth, her practical goodness was both the result of a 
supernatural gift and the witness afforded by the Father to 
the representative of His Son on the earth. St. Ignatius, of 
Antioch, speaks of the Church of the Romans as presiding 
in their region, and also as presiding over the brotherhood 
of divine love. He does not mention the Bishop of Rome 
himself; it was the last thing he would do. He was him- 
self being hauled by the imperial decree, in deference to 
the bitter natural prejudice, to be devoured by the lions at 
Rome. To point out one as the head of the community 
in the city of Rome itself would have been like procuring 
the instant death of the Pope. If St. Peter would not men- 
tion Rome, except under the pseudonym of Babylon, neither 
would St. Ignatius draw attention to the fact that at Rome 
there was a head to the illegal organisation of the Christian 
community. He calls it the Church of the Romans, and says 
that it presides over ' the love,' 1 over a ' communion founded 
on love and preserved by love.' Its presidency was justified 
by its practical and supreme exhibition of the spirit of love ; 
but it was derived from a divine appointment. 

Therefore in these first two centuries after Pentecost, the 
Popes had produced an accessory evidence of their divine 
appointment to be the guardians of the faith. Their ' works ' 
testified. In the fourth century their witness to themselves 
begins. But it does not stand alone. It does not offend against 
the canon of Jewish law concerning testimony, which our 
Lord claimed to satisfy. The most astonishing fact about the 
witness of the Popes concerning their office is that it never 

1 Dr. Dollinger's original rendering is obviously the correct one. ' He 
[Ignatius] first says : fins vpotcddrrrcu iv r6vtp x u pl° v "Pw/Aalwv, in which words he 
does not confine the authority, but only describes the situation, of the Church 
of Rome. He afterwards names this Church *yo* 0017/*^ rrjs kydwri*. These 
words do not signify prcBsulc?is in caritate, as the old Latin translation ren- 
dered them, for then St. Ignatius would have said iv hydmp. 'Aydni signifies, in 
the same manner as *EKK\ri<rla, sometimes a smaller assembly of the faithful 
at the sacred love- feasts, sometimes the entire body of the faithful of all the 
Church— a communion founded on love and preserved by love.' For the 
original of this translation, see p. 33. 




—300 



A LONG LINE OF HEROES 



135 



varied. There is not a solitary exception. Wherever their 
witness is recorded, it is of the same nature. It is as though 
the speech of 260 men of different nationality, temperament, 
and circumstances, stretching over eighteen centuries and a 
half, were the speech of one person, as indeed it was, for these 
several witnesses were the vicars of one Lord, Who spoke 
through them to successive generations. Already in these first 
two centuries Greece, Athens, and Africa, as well as Borne, had 
contributed their occupants to the throne of the fisherman. 
But all alike contributed the same witness, as they exhibited 
that same feature, of rulers conscious of worldwide responsi- 
bilities, and fulfilling them with prison or death before their 
eyes. When, then, a Pope speaks in these early ages con- 
cerning his office, it is reasonable even for a controversialist 
to listen, considering the subsidiary testimony with which that 
office comes before us ; considering also the responsibility 
attaching to that office, according to the Pope's own conception 
of it. The permanent is a shadow of the eternal ; and this 
permanent consciousness of holding a position fraught with 
such tremendous responsibilities suggests a more than human 
origin. 

Our Lord did not admit, as Mr. Puller appears to imagine, 
that His witness to Himself was worthless even from a formal 
point of view, for it was part of the testimony. The Baptist's 
witness, and His own works of mercy, formed the rest. So 
with the witness of His vicars concerning (not, indeed, them- 
selves, but) their office, it must be taken into account ; and it 
would be no sign of ' candour 9 to omit it, but would indicate 
an inadequate appreciation of the nature of testimony. 

In the following pages, therefore, the Popes' witness con- 
cerning their office will be emphasised, though not to the 
exclusion of other witness, but as being in harmony with it, each 
being the counter-signature of the other. The reception of 
that witness on the part of the Church at large will be con- 
sidered as forming its necessary complement, and by this I 
understand the reception by the Church on the whole, not 
taking an occasional murmur, or the resistance of a single 
province, for the settled conviction of the whole Church. A 
boy's grumble is not the same as a permanent rebellion, 




136 A MARVEL OF UNITY. a.d. 96—300 



neither is every resistance to a particular instance of authority, 
or to a particular method of procedure, tantamount to a re- 
pudiation of the authority itself. St. Peter was resisted by 
the Judaising Christians ; but they came round to his judg- 
ment. All Apostle that he was, he yet had to explain to those 
of the circumcision, which in charity he did, the rationale of 
his action, and they acquiesced (rjavxaaav). 1 In Africa, for 
a little moment, some bishops resisted the mode of procedure 
adopted by Rome, but they never questioned her authority as 
supreme : their successors incorporated the very mode of pro- 
cedure into their code. 2 

• Acts xi. 18. ■ Cf. Period III. ch. x. 




PEEIOD n 

A.D. 800—884 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER X. 



THE DONATISTS AND THE COUNCIL OF ABLE 8. 



The fourth century opened with two schisms, one of which 
led to some of the most important literature which the Church 
possesses. The first in point of date was the Meletian schism 
in Egypt, which led to the boundaries of the Alexandrian 
diocese being specially mentioned in the 6th Canon of the 
Council of Nicsea. The second occurred in Africa, and was 
the occasion of some of St. Augustine's most important 
writings on the subject of the Church, in the end of this 
century and the beginning of the fifth. He threw his fiery 
genius into the question of how far scandals affect the note of 
sanctity which the Nicene Creed attributes to the Catholic 
Church. 

I. The centre of the schism was Carthage. Some discon- 
tented presbyters had expressed themselves dissatisfied with 
their bishop and had accused him of having delivered up the 
sacred volumes to the heathen during persecution, and of 
having failed in charity towards those who refused to do the 
same, 1 and had to suffer in consequence. At his death Caecilian 
was elected for his successor, and was consecrated by Felix of 
Aptunga. Seventy bishops of Numidia were on their way to 
the consecration, which, however, was performed before their 
arrival. Finding themselves disappointed of their claim 3 to 
have a hand in the consecration of a primate of the only city 

1 Those who gave np copies of the Holy Scriptures were called Traditores. 
9 In the other parts of Africa the presiding bishop might be of almost any 
see, as the office was attached to seniority, not to the see. 




140 



THE AFRICAN DONATISTS 



a.d. 800 



of Africa which was metropolitical, 1 and discovering also a 
party in Carthage ready for schismatic action, one of these 
Numidian bishops, named Donatus, consecrated a bishop in 
opposition to Caecilian. The latter was accused of having 
been a traditor, and the new schism was supported by the 
immense wealth of a lady named Lucilla, who had been hurt 
by the disciplinary action of Mensurius, the predecessor of 
CaBcilian. The new-elected bishop of the schism was one of 
her household, named Majorinus. 

II. The schism soon assumed formidable proportions in the 
North of Africa, so that the schismatics made the endeavour 
to gain the imperial condemnation of their opponents. They 
appealed to the emperor himself, 9 for which in after times 
St. Augustine perpetually reproached them. 3 The emperor, 
however, not yet Arianised and Erastianised by contact with 
Eusebius of Nicomedia, referred them to Rome. 4 They had 
asked for a judgment from the Gallic bishops, as being in their 
estimation specially free from the taint of ' tradition/ or the 
delivery of the sacred volumes to the heathen.* There is* no 
evidence that they had any idea of the case not being sub- 
mitted to Borne; but as Borne invariably decided matters 
with the assistance of a council, they had asked, and it was 
agreed to, that the assessors in this case should be several of 
them Gallic bishops and the rest Italian. There is nothing 
in the records we possess to sanction the assumption which 
Archbishop Laud makes, viz. that these bishops were forced 
upon the Bishop of Borne. St. Augustine says that Con- 
stantine ' sent ' the bishops to Borne ; but that only applies 
to his ordering them to go, and supplying them with facilities 
for the journey. It is in the last degree improbable that 
there was no concerted action between the emperor and the 
Bishop of Borne, who was himself an African, named 
Melchiadee. The question to be decided was not one that 

1 St. Augustine says that their claim had no foundation, the Bishop of 
Carthage being properly consecrated by a neighbouring bishop, as the Bishop 
of Borne by the Bishop of Ostia (Brevic. CdUai. c. Donat. 8ii diei, o. xvi. 29). 

* Optat. Milev. c. Parmm. lib. i. • Aug. c. lit. PetiL lib. ii. cap. 92. 
4 Aug. Ep. 166 ; Euseb. H. E. x. 5. 

* Probably they also thought that the Gallic bishops would be more under 
the sway of the emperor, whom they hoped to influence. 




—884 



ARE SENT TO ROME. 



141 



concerned the faith, but as to a matter of fact ; but as it 
had to do with bishops the emperor relegated the matter to 
Melchiades and his assessors. This, according to St. 
Augustine, was in accordance with the rules of the Church. 
The emperor all through expressly and strongly deprecated 
the idea of his sitting in judgment on bishops on such a 
matter. 1 

III. GsBcilian was acquitted by the bishops at Rome. 
St. Augustine almost always calls the decision ' the judgment 
of Melchiades/ as though its force was due to his position 
amongst the bishops. 9 Optatus gives the judgment actually 
delivered by him. Melchiades said with respect to Caecilian, 
' I decide that he should deservedly be kept in his ecclesias- 
tical communion, his status being unimpaired.' 3 And so 
St. Augustine, in his account of the conference with the 
Donatists in the following century, calls it ' the judgment 
of the Roman bishop Melchiades, by which Cfficilianus was 
purged and absolved.' 4 And yet it is also ' the decision of 
the bishops who sat at Borne/ on which Constantino declined 
to pass judgment himself, 5 whilst the imperial official at the 
tribunal in Africa asked if ' they had anything to say against 
the council and the judgment of Melchiades, by which Caecilian 
was purged and absolved/ i.e. from the charge. 6 Elsewhere 
St. Augustine calls the said decision ' the judgment of the 
Churches beyond the seas founded by apostolical toil/ 
alluding to St. Peter and St. Paul. 7 Again and again St. 
Augustine insists that the judgment of Melchiades ought to 
have been final, and further, that in repudiating that judgment 
the Donatists were putting themselves out of communion 
with the whole world, and putting the whole world into the 
position of traditores, because the whole world ' believed the 
judges who absolved [Csecilian] rather than the accusers who 
incriminated him.' But in his letter on the Donatists in 

1 Mansi, t. ii. p. 748. 

■ E.g. throughout the conference with the Donatists in 411. 
• Optat. c. Parmen. lib. i. 

4 Ad Donatistas post Collationem liber unus, cap. xiii. 

5 Loc. ext. cap. xliv. 29. 

' Brevic. Collat. c. Donat. 3ii diei, cap. xviii. 33. 
7 C. Creacon. lib. ill. cap. lxvii. 



Digitized by 



Google 




142 



THE PAPAL DECISION 



a.d. 300 



398, St. Augustine has a passage of the very first importance 
as throwing light on his ideas of Church government. He is 
contrasting the sentence of Melchiades with that of the seventy 
Numidian bishops who favoured the Donatists' candidate. He 
says, ' And yet of what character was that final sentence issued 
by the blessed Melchiades? — how innocent, how complete, 
how prudent and peace-making ! By that judgment he both 
did not venture to remove from their ecclesiastical position 1 
colleagues against whom nothing had been proved, and whilst 
chiefly blaming Donatus alone, whom he had discovered to be 
at the head of the whole matter, he gave the rest the free 
option of recovering their position, being prepared as he was 
to send letters of communion even to those who it was 
shown had been ordained by Majorinus : so that in whatever 
places there were two bishops, owing to the dissension, he 
[i.e. Melchiades] would confirm the one who had been first 
ordained, whilst another flock should be provided for the other 
to rule. 0 best of men, 0 Son of Christian peace, and 
Father of the Christian people ! ' (' Ep.' 48, al. 162.) 

IV. -From the passages just quoted, we gather that the 
ecclesiastical status of the bishops in Africa rested with 
Melchiades, whose judgment in the matter was to a Catholic 
final. ' Because Constantino ' (St. Augustine says elsewhere) 
1 did not dare to judge the case of a bishop, he delegated it to 
be discussed and terminated by bishops, which also was done in 
the city of Rome under the presidency of Melchiades, the 
Bishop of that Church, with many of his colleagues.' 2 But the 
sentence was the sentence of Melchiades, according to St. 
Augustine. It rested with him to 4 send letters of communion ' 
to the bishops in Africa, whose case was under consideration, 
and it was for him to ' confirm ' them in their ecclesiastical 
status. He did in synod confirm Cfflcilian in his position at 
Carthage ; and accordingly St. Augustine says that Csecilian 
1 was able not to care for the multitude of enemies that con- 
spired against him when he saw himself in communion with 

1 1 De collegio' — i.e. from amongst his own colleagues, from his own partner- 
ship—but that the above is the meaning is clear from the actual words of 
the sentence given by Optatus, which I have quoted on p. 141. 

■ Ep. ad Donat. 105, 8. 




—884 



DESCRIBED BY AUGUSTINE. 



143 



the Roman Church, in which the principalship of the Apostolic 
chair has ever been in force, and with the other lands, where 
the Gospel came to Africa itself, where [i.e. in the West] he 
was prepared to plead his cause if his adversaries attempted 
to alienate those Churches from him. 9 (' Ep.' 48, 7.) 

Nothing, it seems to me, can be clearer, if one takes into 
account the whole of St. Augustine's writings concerning the 
Donatists, and they are considerable and full of details and 
of summaries that by their repetition and precision enable 
us to form a fair estimate of his idea of Church govern- 
ment — nothing, I say, seems to me clearer than that St. 
Augustine considered that the canonical justification of the 
position assigned to Melchiades in this matter was the fact 
that the See of Rome was the See of the Apostle Peter, and 
not that it was the imperial centre. The latter never once 
appears in the whole of St. Augustine's voluminous writings on 
the subject of the Donatist schism ; the apostolical character 
and consequent jurisdictional primacy of the See of Rome is 
written in characters so large that I am unable to understand 
how anyone could deny it to be the teaching of our saint. If 
there be any one passage in which this conception of the See 
of Rome seems to be contradicted, I make bold to say that the 
evidence on the other side is so overwhelming that such a 
passage must be interpreted by the great mass of statements 
vice versd. I do not know of any such passage, after reading 
through this long correspondence on the schism ; but if there 
be such, it must be capable of the interpretation I have 
suggested. It is clear from the passages quoted above, that 
St. Augustine had no idea of causes of bishops being terminated 
in Africa. If proof positive were needed in addition, we have 
it in the last sentence of the chapter in that same letter, in 
which he speaks of the principalship of the Roman Church in 
connection with the judgment at Rome of African bishops. 
He there blames the Donatist bishop, Secundus, for having 
condemned bishops in their absence, forgetting that such 
bishops could not only appeal to the judgment of other 
colleagues, but especially to that ' of the Apostolical Churches,' 
— to that they could ' reserve their whole case.' There was no 
Apostolical Church in Africa ; the only one to which they could 




144 



THE COUNCIL OF ARLES 



a.d. 300 



appeal was at Rome. There he sat who was not only what the 
occupants of other Apostolical Sees were, but ' the Father of 
the Christian people.' (Cf. p. 142, line 19.) 

V. ' But the Donatists appealed from the judgment of the 
Pope, Melchiades.' They did. And this was one of the 
counts in the heavy indictment which St. Augustine brought 
against them. He tells us how the emperor himself deprecated 
such an enormity, on the ground that bishops were the proper 
judges of bishops. 1 

Why, then, did not the emperor simply enforce their 
obedience, instead of waiting to issue the decrees which he 
afterwards did, depriving them of their churches ? What the 
emperor did was to assign them a fresh tribunal, composed for 
the most part of Gallic bishops. It is here that a number of 
writers have jumped to a conclusion which is not warranted 
by the facts. It was not an appeal from Borne to a larger 
council. Mr. Haddan, in his article on ' Aries ' (Smith and 
Cheetham's ' Dictionary of Christian Antiquities'), falls into a 
mistake which Mr. Ffoulkes, in Smith and Wace's 'Dictionary 
of Christian Biography,' stigmatises as ' either as gross a mis- 
conception or as wilful a misstatement as ever proceeded from 
a learned man.' 3 Mr. Haddan says that St. Augustine calls the 
Council of Aries, to which the case was now remitted, a 
' universal council ! ' It is extraordinary how widespread the 
error is, that St. Augustine called the Council of Aries ' a 
plenary council of the universal Church.' As a matter of 
fact, he only says that if the Donatists were not satisfied with 
their judges at Rome, 1 there remained a plenary Council of the 
universal Church,' but that they fiad not availed themselves of 
this.* The Donatists, after the sentence of Melchiades, pre- 

" Ep. 43, 7. 

* Ep. 162. S. Optatus, c. Parmen. lib. i. says that the emperor spoke of 
them 4 just as infidels' for appealing to him. 

* Mr. Ffoulkes is speaking of Bishop Hefele, who commits the same mis- 
take. 

4 St. Augustine does not suggest this alternative as though the rest of the 
episcopate could review a Papal decision on a matter of faith, but on such a 
question as this it was open to the Pope to use as his organ of judgment 
a fuller council. A plenary council, such as St. Augustine suggested, would 
include the Pope, through his legates or by his confirmation. 




—384 



NOT AN APPEAL FROM ROME, 



145 



tended that some facts had not been brought forward concern- 
ing Caecilianus' consecrator, Felix of Aptonga. Nay, more, they 
declared that Melchiades had himself been a traditor, and 
consequently was not qualified to act as Bishop of Borne. 
These were all matters of fact, and Constantine decided upon 
having them cleared up in order to leave the Donatists, who 
were disturbing the civil order in Africa, no room for further 
complaint. Accordingly, the emperor had the matter sifted 
by his proconsul in Africa, and ' gave these Donatist bishops 
another council, at Aries. 9 The question was not a matter of 
faith ; but still Constantine refused to do anything but appoint 
fresh judges. It was not a higher court. For though the 
Pope was not there himself, his legates were, and they pre- 
sided over the inquiry. Mr. Haddan makes an assertion in 
the ' Dictionary of Christian Antiquities ' 1 which is both incor- 
rect and misleading. He says that the emperor ' summoned 
other bishops from Sicily, Italy (not the Bishop of Borne, he 
having been one of the former judges), etc/ But the Pope was 
represented by four legates, Claudius, Vitus, Eugenius, and 
Cvriacus,' which shows that the council was not an appeal to 
a higher court, but merely the assignment of fresh assessors, 
• other bishops/ ' alios episcopos, 9 as St. Augustine says, sitting 
with the representatives of Pope Sylvester, who had now suc- 
ceeded to Melchiades. 9 It was granted, says St. Augustine, in 
spite of the great authority of the council at Borne (' tant® 
auctoritatis episcopos '), whose numbers were not commensu- 
rate with its authority ; and it was granted ' not because it 
was now ' (t.*. after the council at Borne) ' necessary, but as a 
concession to their perversities, and out of a desire to restrain 
such great shamelessness in every way (' omnimodo cupiens 
tan tarn impudentiam cohibere')* 4 It was, indeed, a concession 
on the part of Borne also ; for it is reasonable to suppose that 
Constantine was acting in concert with St. Sylvester. The 
emperor was himself in Gaul ; and the impudent Donatists, 
as St. Augustine calls them, had a special leaning to the 

1 Article on 1 Aries.' * Mansi, t. ii. p. 470. 

• Cf. Ddllinger's Ch. Hist. Period IL cap. y. sec 2. • Almost immediately 
after his accession this pontiff [Sylvester] sent his legates to the Synod of Aries.' 

* Ep. 43, 20. 

L 



Digitized by 



146 



NOR ON MATTERS OF FAITH. 



a.d. 300 



Gallic bishops. He therefore arranged for the council to meet 
at Aries in 814. It was not, then, a plenary council reviewing 
the decision of Melchiades, but arose from a determination on 
the part of the emperor to give these Donatists no excuse 
for not submitting. He flatly refused to hear them himself, 
but instead handed their case again to the episcopate, consist- 
ing this time of Papal legates and other bishops, whose number 
is variously estimated — according to a false reading of St. 
Augustine, two hundred, but according to the list of signa- 
tures we possess not more than thirty-two. The emperor 
was himself present, although only a catechumen, but as the 
business of the council did not relate to matters of faith, his 
position was not as abnormal as it would otherwise have 
been. 1 He had submitted the matter to investigation in 
Africa by his proconsul ; for the Donatists had raised the 
question of the canonicity of Felix's consecration, which had 
not been explicitly dealt with at Borne. He had hoped that 
Ingentius, who had confessed to having forged a letter in the 
name of Caecilian, might make his confession before him, 
but he had eventually preferred that the matter should be dealt 
with by a synod of bishops. The synod decided against the 
Donatists. In other words, the synod decided that there was 
nothing in the supposed fresh matter to induce the new Pope 
to reverse the judgment of Melchiades. 2 

VI. The Synod of Aries has a special interest for us, as two 
British bishops — one of them the Bishop of London — at- 
tended it. And a matter was decided there which throws 
light on the contention of the British bishops that their rule 
for observing Easter was the right one. ' The British bishops ' 
(say Haddan and Stubbs) ' must have consented to the follow- 
ing canons amongst others.' Amongst them they give the 

1 It is not certain who presided. Mr. Ffoulkes is certain that Marinas of 
Aries did not (Diet, of Chr. Biog. t art. • Marinus '). Bailerini thinks it is possible 
that he did. It is not a matter of controversial importance, considering the 
purpose and nature of the council. Chrestus, Bishop of Syracuse, signed first. 
But we cannot argue safely from the list of signatures. Probably the legates 
were, after all, the presidents 

* A reversal which, had it taken place, would not have trenched upon the 
infallibility of Melchiades, since it was not a matter whioh came within the 
scope of Papal infallibility. 




—384 



THE COUNCIL'S LETTER. 



147 



following : — 'In the first place, concerning the celebration of 
Easter, it shall be kept at one time and on the same day 
throughout the world by us and as thou shalt by letters, accord- 
ing to custom 9 direct.' 1 This canon occurs in the letter 
addressed by the synod to the Bishop of Eome ' as thou shalt 
by letters, according to custom, direct/ referring to him. It 
is clear from this that St. Victor's efforts to procure uniformity 
in regard to the Paschal Feast had not been without effect, 
for in 314 it was a ' custom ' for the Bishop of Rome to 
' direct ' the Churches as to the day of its observance. The 
British bishops in their controversy with Augustine merely 
clung to what they had received from Borne, in ignorance 
that it had been changed. 

VII. The council sent a letter to the Pope, expressing their 
conviction that their sentence against the Donatists was even 
more lenient than it might have been, if the Pope had been 
present in person — te pariter nobiscum judicante.* But as he 
could not leave those parts ' in which the Apostles daily sit ' — 
i.e. St. Peter and St. Paul — they have drawn up the decrees, 
which they send, hoping that he will communicate them to 
the rest of the world — of course, supposing that he approved 
them. The letter speaks of St. Sylvester as not only sitting 
where the Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul sit — i.e. as occupying 
the see founded and guided by them — but also as holding 
1 the greater dioceses,' and it decided that persons who had 
been baptised by heretics with the proper form should not 
be rebaptised, but should be received by imposition of hands — 
passages from which we can form some idea of the religious 
teaching in this land in the fourth century. 

The Donatists' next step after this decision at Aries was 
condemned by the emperor and all Catholics. They again 
appealed to His Imperial Majesty from the judgment of the 
episcopate. It is unfortunate that we have no record of the 
motives which induced the emperor to rehear the case. We 

1 Ecclesiastical Councils (Haddan and Stubbs), vol. i. p. 7, note. 

• Mansi, t. ii. p. 469. Some writers (e.g. Dr. Wordsworth, Thcophilus Angli- 
canus) consider that the word pariter involves an assertion of equality in judg- 
ment. But it must be admitted that the word does not necessarily mean 
anything more than our English ' together with,' which would admit of any 
amount of inequality between the parties thus acting together. 



l 2 




148 



ARCHBISHOP LAUD'S 



a.d. 800 



know that he disapproved of their step, and very reluctantly 
yielded. 1 He allowed them to come to Milan, but only to 
reiterate the original sentence against them, and eventually 
to deprive them of their churches. 

VIII. The Council of Aries, however, has another interest 
for us, besides the fact that our fellow-countrymen were present. 
In the movement out of the Calvinism which had flooded 
the land since its change of religion, the party of decency and 
order, as we may fairly call the followers of Laud, stood 
between two fires ; on the one side from the Puritans, who 
brought their king and archbishop to the scaffold, and on the 
other side from the Catholics, who urged the return of the 
High Church party to the bosom of the Catholic Church. The 
grounds on which they defended themselves have more than 
an antiquarian interest for us in England, for indeed many of 
the arguments used then for the purpose of preventing the 
chivalrous champions of ecclesiastical order from submitting 
to Home are repeated in the controversial books of the pre- 
sent day. Amongst them is to be found an argument sup- 
posed to be derived from the Council of Aries. We have 
already seen that Mr. Haddan, in Smith's 'Dictionary of 
Christian Antiquities/ made a point of Home not being sum- 
moned to it, ignoring the fact that Papal legates attended, and 
that he appeared to view it as an appeal to a plenary council 
of the universal Church from the judgment of the Pope. Mr. 
Ffoulkes, we have seen, considers it ' as gross a misconception 
or as wilful a misstatement as ever proceeded from a learned 
man * (' Diet, of Chr. Biogr.' art. ' Marinus ') to say (as Mr. 
Haddan does) that St. Augustine called the council universal. 
It is not surprising that some who lean much on history 
should say, as nowadays many do, * Whom are we to believe ? ' 
] llstory, as the Catholic Church gives it to us, placing its key 
in our hands, is one thing; history without that key may 
easily become a labyrinth in which a lifetime may be spent in 
futile attempts to find the centre. But Archbishop Laud 
B icceeded in impressing on his generation a view of history 
v hich contented a great many, and which it is, therefore, a 

1 He asked pardon of the bishops, St. Augustine says (Brevic. CoUat. 
pars 3). 




—384 



INTERPRETATION 



149 



matter of interest to examine. I shall take the argument by 
which he repels the evidence adduced by his adversary, the 
Jesuit, from St. Augustine's words, quoted above, about the 
• principalship,' or sovereignty of the Roman chair. 

First, he gives an account of the origin of that principal- 
ship, or sovereignty, or primacy, which certainly was not St. 
Augustine's. He says : ' The Soman patriarch by ecclesias- 
tical constitution might, perhaps [sic], have a primacy of 
order ; but for principality of power the patriarchs were as 
even, as equal, as the Apostles were before them. . . . The 
truth is, this " more powerful principality " the Roman bishops 
got under the emperors when they became Christian.' 1 Now 
St. Augustine, writing about the first Christian emperor, and 
he not yet baptised, says that this principality ' has always 
been in force ' (' semper viguit,' Ep. 43, 7). 

But Laud proceeds : ' And to prove that St. Augustine did 
not intend by principatus here to give the Roman Bishop any 
power out of his own limits (which God knows were far short 
of the whole Church), I shall make it most manifest out of 
the very same epistle. " For afterwards," saith St. Augustine, 
" when the pertinacity of the Donatists could not be restrained 
by the African bishops only, they gave them leave to be heard 
by foreign bishops." ' It will be seen by comparison with St. 
Augustine's words, as quoted above, how thoroughly inaccurate 
this is to begin with. There was no leave given 1 in Africa* 
But in the next sentence Laud mistranslates the Latin, and 
applies the saint's words in his own favour instead of exactly 
the other way. He quotes, or professes to quote, St. Augus- 
tine's own words : ' And yet peradventure Melchiades, the 
Bishop of the Roman Church, with his colleagues, the trans- 
marine bishops (nan debuit) ought not to usurp to himself this 
judgment, which was determined by seventy African bihhoj s, 
Tigisitanus sitting primate. And what will you say if he did 
not usurp this power ? For the emperor, being desired, sent 

1 Library of Anglo-CathoUc Theology (Oxford), Land's Works, vol. L. 
§ xxv. 10, p. 186. All the quotations that follow are taken from this volume. 

* The Emperor expressly says that the removal of the ca*e to Borne was bit 
own doing, in his letter to Melchiades (Eos. x. 5). But it is otmous from its 
terms, and from St Aagustine's account {Ep. 43, 14), that he was referring 
them to a tribunal recognised as supreme by the orthodox in Africa. 




150 



BASED ON A 



a.d. 800 



bishops, judges, which should sit with him and determine 
what was just upon the whole cause.' It will be noticed that 
there is rather a lack of logic in these words of St. Augustine 
as given by Laud. The question, ' And what will you say, 
&c. ? ' suggests that St. Augustine did not think it a usurpa- 
tion on the part of the Bishop of Borne, whilst the preceding 
words make the saint stigmatise it as such. But this, as I 
shall show, is owing to Laud's mistranslation. It will be best, 
however, to proceed with his deductions. 

'In which passage' (says Laud) 'there are very many 
things observable ; as, first, that the Roman prelate came not 
in till there was leave for them to go to " transmarine 
bishops." ' 

There is no evidence whatever that they asked or obtained 
leave from the African bishops. St. Augustine says that they 
simply appealed to the emperor, and he remitted the case to 
Borne. 

' Secondly ' (says Laud), ' that if the Pope had come in 
without this leave, it had been a " usurpation." ' 

Now this point rests on Laud's mistranslation. The 
word* he quotes from St. Augustine are his, all except two 
little words at the beginning. Instead of the words 'And 
yet,' St. Augustine asks a question, and uses — no equivalent 
for the words ' and yet,' but — the particle which marks the 
beginning of a question. 1 He supposes the Donatists to make 
the objection ; so that the words which Laud professes to 
transcribe from the pen of St. Augustine as his first view of 
the case are the words which St. Augustine puts into the 
mouth of the Donatists and at once proceeds to controvert ! 
His question, ' And what will you say, if he did not usurp 
this power?' contains his answer, or the beginning of his 
answer, to the objection which he supposes the Donatists to 
raise against the judgment of Melchiades. The Donatist is 
supposed to call it a usurpation ; St. Augustine combats the 
Donatist contention. Laud puts it the other way, and makes 
it plausible by his mistranslation. 

But he proceeds : ' Thirdly, that when he [i.e. the 
Pope] did thus come in, not by his own proper authority, 



1 ' An forte,* <tc. 




—384 



MISTRANSLATION OF 



161 



bat by leave, there were other bishops made "judges with 



Here, again, the ' leave 9 is harped upon, for which there 
is no evidence, and assessors are assumed as detracting from 
the supreme authority of the Pope. But to this hour Popes 
aet with assistance from bishops or cardinals, and in greater 
matters from a council. 

Again : ' Fourthly, that these other bishops were " ap- 
pointed and sent by the emperor," and his power; that 
which the Pope will least of all endure.' Laud puts the 
words ' appointed and sent by the emperor ' as though they 
were quotations from St. Augustine ; but he has slipped in 
the word ' appointed.' St. Augustine only says ' sent ' — we 
do not know with how much concerted action between the 
emperor and the Pope. 

Laud continues with a complete misinterpretation of 
another passage : ' Lastly, lest the Pope and his adherents 
should say that this was a usurpation in the emperor, St. 
Augustine tells us a little before, in the same epistle still, 
" that this doth chiefly belong ad curam ejus, to the emperor's 
care and charge, and that he is to give an account to God for 



Now one would suppose that ' this ' relates in St. Augus- 
tine to the same as Laud has been speaking of before, as he 
adduces it to show that the previous affair, as understood by 
him, was not in St. Augustine's eyes a usurpation on the 
part of the emperor. Will not any reader, who has not been 
able to study the passage in the original, be surprised to find 
that St. Augustine is referring to a wholly different stage of 
the proceedings, and to a matter which was, according to the 
teaching of Laud's adversary, well within the power of the 
emperor ? St. Augustine, in this last passage, is dealing with 
another objection by the Donatists. After the synod at 
Borne had decided in favour of CaBcilianus' consecration and 
against the Donatists, the latter brought forward a new point 
about Felix of Aptunga. This was a matter of fact, which 
could be determined by a secular tribunal. The emperor 
ordered his proconsul to investigate it in Africa. The Dona- 
tists hypocritically objected in after years that a proconsul 



him.' 



»» i 



it: 




152 



SAINT AUGUSTINE. 



a.d. 800—884 



was not the proper judge of bishops. St. Augustine reminds 
them of the way in which the proconsul was commissioned 
by the emperor, to whom the care of such a matter properly 
belonged. Besides, St. Augustine urges that they had them- 
selves appealed to the emperor, and if they considered it 
wrong for a proconsul to investigate the question of Felix's 
antecedents in Africa, ' how much more blameworthy must 
they be who wished to make an earthly king the judge of 
their case ! 1 1 In a word, St. Augustine is urging the very 
opposite conclusion to that which Laud deduces from his 
words. 



1 Ep. 48, § 18. 




CHAPTER XI. 



THE COUNCIL OF NIC2EA. 

§ I. — The Reasons for its being convoked. 

I. The history of the Church consists of the record of her 
perpetual proposal of divine mysteries to the human intelli- 
gence, and of the acceptance or repudiation of her authority 
by a nature wounded through the fall in Eden. One result 
of that fall is the reluctance that men feel to submit to a 
master. There is no man that is not called at some time of 
his life to sacrifice his natural love of independence in obe- 
dience to authority. But it is not every man that will bind 
his intelligence on the mount of sacrifice and merit to re- 
ceive it back again from God in a new supernatural life. 
Hence the conflicts of heresy in the history of the Church. 
The very word heresy implies deliberate choice ; and the 
deliberate choice which constitutes heresy is a determined 
rebellion against the authority that, bringing with it ade- 
quate credentials, proposes the subject matter of divine reve- 
lation. 

The history of the Church is, therefore, the history of a 
series of conflicts between authority and the rebellious in- 
stincts of our fallen nature, which protest against rule, 
dominion, and lordship, even though submission be the portal 
of Paradise itself. 

But these conflicts with heresy were not all so much loss 
to the Church. As the original rebellion in Paradise was the 
felix culpa which led to the greater gift of the Incarnation, 
so the lapse of heretics led to the Church bringing out her 
stores of wisdom and exhibiting the majesty of her divinely 
given authority. There is no better cordial for drooping 
courage than a study of the evolution of her grandeur as she 



Digitized by 



154 



A COUNCIL NOT INCONSISTENT 



a.d. 300 



rode through the storms of the fourth and fifth centuries. 
The majesty of her Divine Head was assaulted and in danger 
of being undermined under every conceivable aspect. But 
without these assaults we might have been poorer in our 
knowledge of what the Church was and what she could do. 
It has been well said that * it was not until after some con- 
flict that the Church exercised her full authority as guardian 
of the ancient faith in all its integrity, whose duty it is to 
repress all error, and all principles that may lead to error, 
among Christians. By this conflict the Church was led of 
necessity to unfold, with ample fulness, the truth of her doc- 
trine, which was at first more implicit, and although perfectly 
understood, not fully expressed ; to define it more particularly 
and in distinct formulas against every error. This is a ser- 
vice which heresies have at all times conferred upon the 
Church.' 1 

And there is no spectacle in all history more worthy of 
our admiration than the serene majesty with which the Holy 
See articulated the teaching of Jesus Christ through all the 
storms that raged against the Church in the days of persecu- 
tion. But with the fourth century came the era of great 
councils, beginning with that held at Nicaea and ending with 
that held at Chalcedon. These stand apart, with features of 
their own, and have obtained a position which St. Gregory 
the Great likens to that of the four gospels. It will be my 
object in the following pages to exhibit the share which the 
Holy See took in the destruction of heresy and the orderly 
exhibition of the deposit of truth committed to the Church's 
care during this era of her conciliar action. 

II. But why, it has been asked, a council at all, if the 
Pope is himself infallible ? Might not the Church have been 
spared the trouble of meeting in council at all ? 2 Indeed, it 
has been said that the fact of the Nicene Council having been 
held is the most perfect refutation of the assertion made in 

1 Dollinger's Ch. Hist Period I. cap. ii. § 7. 

9 This was the argument constantly used by Dr. Pusey : e.g. * Had Papal 
infallibility been then believed, Sylvester, or St. Damasus, or St. Celestine, or 
St. Leo might by themselves have set at rest the heresies of Arias/ <fec. (Sermon 
on the Rule of Faith, 2nd ed. Preface, p. 18). 




—384 



WITH PAPAL INFALLIBILITY. 



155 



the Vatican decrees that the ex caihedrd infallibility of the 
Pope was always known to the Church. It is asked, ' On the 
principle of the Vatican dogmas, why did not Pope Sylvester 
close the question by an ex caihedrd judgment ?•' 1 and it is 
added that ' the negligence, on the part alike of the Church 
and the Pope, was simply treasonable ' — i.e. on the supposition 
that Papal infallibility was a known truth. 

All these objections are based on a misconception of * the 
principle of the Vatican dogmas.' It is no part of the doc- 
trine of infallibility that the Pope was able at any moment to 
' close the question,' when he had to deal with such people as 
the Arians; just as it is no part of the Church's teaching 
that our Divine Lord could close the question about His 
heavenly origin in addressing the Jews in the synagogue at 
Capharnaum. And yet He was in a higher sense infallible. 8 
It cannot be argued that our Lord was not Almighty God 
because the people said, ' If Thou be the Christ, tell us plainly,' 
and because He taught them in a way which did not convince 
them all. And so with His Vicar. It might need a longer 
management, or a different mode of expression from an ex 
cathedrd judgment, to bring the Arians to their bearings and 
* close the question.' The writers who have advanced this 
objection believe the Nicene Creed to be as authoritative an 
expression of revealed truth as can be had ; but the Nicene 
Creed did not 1 close the question.' The Pope is not more 
infallible than the whole Church, and yet the voice of what 
the objectors would consider the whole Church has not 
sufficed to close the question for some of their own teachers. 

HI. But the objection thus confidently urged against the 
truth that under certain circumstances the successor of Peter 
is secure of divine assistance against leading the Church 
astray (i.e. is under certain conditions infallible), ignores the 
circumstances under which the Council of Nicsea was assem- 

1 The Roman Claims tested by Antiquity, by W. Bright, D.D., Prof, of 
Eccles. Hist, in the Univ. of Oxford, 1877, p. 9 — one of the books recommended 
in the list drawn np by the English Church Union. Of. also Preface to Lives 
of Three Fathers, by the same author. 

* Canon Liddon, in his last Bampton Lecture, was perfectly right in argu- 
ing that our Lord alone was infallible in the sense in which he uses the term ; he 
was mistaken in his exaggerated idea of what is involved in Papal infallibility 




156 



ROME'S TEACHING WELL KNOWN, 



A.D. 300 



bled. It was not a new question that it had to discuss. It 
was not one on which anyone had the slightest doubt as to 
the judgment of the Pope. It has already been observed that 
the real forerunner of Arius was excommunicated, in the per- 
son of Theodotus, by Pope St. Victor. And the first open 
conflict on the subject of the term Homooimos (or consub- 
stantial) as applied to the Eternal Son, had been set at rest 
by another Pope, St. Dionysius. His namesake of Alexandria 
had used similes concerning the relation of the Son to the 
Father which were liable to misrepresentation, and had with- 
drawn them, and informed the Pope that he only did not use 
the word consubstantial because he did not find it in Holy 
Scripture, but that he believed and taught the doctrine therein 
contained. 1 St. Dionysius, the Pope, in his synod, had 
declared the doctrine signified by the term to be of faith, and 
set his seal to the use of the term itself (Homoousios) without, 
however, making it a matter of absolute obligation on the 
whole Church. It was henceforth used at Rome and Alexan- 
dria as the fittest symbol of the relationship of the Son to the 
Father. So that Christians were not left in doubt as to the 
faith up to the hour of the Council of NicaBa. St. Athanasius 
(loc. cit.) says that the gist of the Arian heresy had been con- 
demned on this occasion (c. 262) by the Pope St. Dionysius, 
4 and so was long ago {sKiraXai) anathematised by all.' * For 
St. Dionysius and his synod had proclaimed that the Son 
was in no sense a creature, but was of one substance with 
the Father. 

In the beginning of the fourth century the heresy 
reappeared in the teaching of a priest at Antioch, named 

1 Athanas. De Sen ten t ia Dionysii, n. 14. 

s It has been said that the word 6^oo6aios was condemned by the Council 
of Antioch in 269 (e.g. Salmon on Infallibility, p. 292). St. Athanasius, St. 
Basil, and St. Hilary seem to allow this. But St. Athanasius says that he had 
not seen the letter of the Council nor been able to learn its contents. St. Basil 
appears to be speaking of the Council of Ancyra, a semi -Arian council in 358, 
for he gives their known motives and assigns them to Antioch. St. Hilary 
makes the two councils say exactly the same thing. Dr. Ddllinger has an 
exhaustive note on the subject (Ch. Hist. Period I. cap. ii. sec. 7), and concludes 
that its rejection by the Synod of Antioch, in its true meaning, is ' contrary to 
all historical evidence.' De Smedt argues forcibly that the term, though not 
the doctrine, was repudiated at Antioch (Diss. vi.). 




—884 



Birr NEEDED ENFORCING 



157 



Lucian, among whose pupils was the priest of Alexandria, 
named Arius, of great parts and most attractive ways. This 
is not the place in which to give his teaching in detail. Suffice 
it to say that in his descriptions of the Son, or Logos, or 
Word, of God, whilst he exalted Him far above all other 
creatures, placing His origin even before time, he yet denied 
to Him strict eternity, or a real generation from the Essence 
of the Father. His teaching spread like wildfire in the East, 
even Eusebius, Bishop of Csesarea, the father of Church his- 
tory, being carried away by it. It is an unutterable loss to 
history that Eusebius was thus out of sympathy with the real 
mind of the Nicene Fathers. Whilst, therefore, he indulges in 
a grand description of the council, he has omitted all that we 
most wish to know. 

The teaching, then, which had been condemned by St. 
Dionysius was spreading over the East. What was the Pope 
to do? Hold another Council in the West and issue an 
ex cathedrd judgment on the whole question ? But the ques- 
tion had already been closed by St. Dionysius. Should he, 
then, excommunicate every bishop who was not teaching in 
perfect accord with Rome ? But it needed the apparatus of 
a council to discover who were, and who were not, teaching 
the true faith. 1 The Arians were proverbially slippery. 

IY. The step actually taken was due to the fact that in the 
Providence of God the Emperor Constantino now occupied 
himself with the Eastern portion of his empire. He had seen 
the unity of the Church in the West. He found the East 
torn with dissension. After attempting to introduce the idea 
that the contention was for nothing real, and discovering his 
mistake, he resolved that the bishops should meet together, 
and so be brought to some definite issue. He might, of course, 
have done as the three emperors did half a century later — 

1 • Almighty God did not wiU that it should be by the voice of one man that 
heresies should be slain. He had an office for the Universal Church through- 
out the world. He had an office for the Church, as a whole, to bear witness to 
the truth • (Pusey's Sermon on the Rule of Faith, Pref. p. xxxiv.). This, which 
Dr. Pusey thought a conclusive argument against the Vatican Decrees, is, 
nevertheless, part of the teaching of those decrees. One of the most curious 
phenomena of contemporary history is the continued misunderstanding of those 
decrees by Dr. Pusey and others. 




158 



IN THE EAST 



a.d. 300 



issue an edict that all who wished to retain their churches 
must teach the religion handed down by the Apostle Peter to 
the Romans — but Constantino was not yet baptised, and it is 
impossible to suppose that a Pio Nono would have advised 
such a remedy under the circumstances. The idea of a 
council on a larger scale than had yet been tried was sug- 
gested to the emperor by the episcopate. It was convoked, 
says Eufinus, a contemporary, ' by the advice of the bishops, 
ex sententid sacerdotnm. 9 1 It was not likely to be the sugges- 
tion of Eusebius, nor the rest of the Arianising bishops. 
They had not yet gained the emperor's ear, and it was the 
last thing they would desire. Judging from a statement of 
the sixth Council, composed entirely of Eastern bishops, and 
held subsequently to the time when the extent of the claims 
of Rome were, by the confession of all writers, distinctly 
understood, the idea of the Nicene Council was not due to the 
emperor, but to the Pope himself. Rome and Alexandria 
were in close correspondence on the crisis, and it is in the 
highest degree probable that they had agreed that the best 
way of assisting the East was by a solemn consultation. This 
is looking at the matter from a purely historical point of view. 
Such notices as we have all suggest that the idea came from 
Rome and Alexandria. 

V. And the reasons why St. Sylvester might reasonably 
and not ' treasonably 9 (as the above-mentioned writer insists *) 
prefer a conciliar judgment in the East to an ex cathedra 
judgment from Rome itself, were possibly such as these : 

An ex cathedrd judgment was usually given with a certain 
solemnity of circumstance, such as a council of the bishops 
who were in Rome, and those, besides, whom the Pope might 
be pleased to select. Such an authoritative utterance, making 
the term 4 Homoousios 9 a condition of Catholic communion 
(which was all that was needed, the doctrine having been 
already settled) might have been sent from the West to the 

1 Lib. i. cap. 1. Dr. Salmon flatly contradicts Rufinas. He says (Infall. p. 
289), ' The bringing it together was entirely the emperor's idea.' But he gives 
no authority for his assertion, and appears to have forgotten the quotation 
given above. 

* Bright's Roman Claims, Ac. he. tit. 




BY A COUNCIL, 



159 



East. This would have been the 4 despotic 9 method of rule. 
But the * politic' 1 mode of action was clearly to have the 
council in the East, and to call upon the bishops there to 
exercise their judgment upon the matter. For it is part of 
the episcopal office, according to the Vatican decrees, to use 
its judgment, and the free use of the same in no way inter- 
feres with the truth of Papal infallibility, as defined by those 
decrees. To judge after the Pope is not to act as his superior, 
but as a subordinate judge. It is not proclaiming his judg- 
ment useless, but following it spontaneously as the norm. 
Whilst a discordant judgment would subject the bishop to 
anathema, a concordant judgment is of value. In a council 
information would be given, personal contact with the ortho- 
dox would do its proper work, an Athanasius (although but a 
deacon) would exert the influence due to his character, and 
the unity of the Church would be made plain. 

Moreover, it cannot be too carefully borne in mind that 
Papal infallibility does not mean inspiration, but only Divine 
assistance. Such assistance requires the Pope to use human 
means to ascertain the truths to be proclaimed : e.g. discussion 
may be necessary to enable the Pope to decide as to whether 
this or that is in the deposit, whether it is the logical, outcome 
of such and such a revealed doctrine. And among such means 
of arriving at the truth, one of peculiar efficacy is that of 
convoking a General Council and taking the witness of 
the Fathers. Thus, a General Council may be included in 
the action of infallibility, although the ultimate result in the 
shape of the final definition is only certain by reason of the 
charisma bestowed on the Holy Father. In the case of the 
first four councils, the decision of the Pope was already formed, 
and, therefore, they were not needed for that purpose, but 
they were conducive to the ends which the Holy Father had 
in view, and were, therefore, suggested or accepted by him as 
the case might be. 2 

The way, then, in which St. Sylvester elected to govern 
the Church was by a council in the East, which the emperor 

1 Readers of Aristotle will remember his distinction between the despotic 
and politic methods of government. 

* It was in the council that they discovered that nothing short of the use of 
the term Homoousios would avail. Cf. Athan. De Dear. Nic. Syn. n. 20. 




160 



WHICH IS ONE MODE 



a.d. 300 



hailed for the fulfilment of his own desire for the unity of the 
Church as the safeguard of his empire. St. Sylvester knew 
well that Papal infallibility does not act like magic. The 
writers from whom I have quoted appear to imagine that he 
had only to raise his voice, and if the doctrine of infallibility 
had been held by the Church, * the question would have been 
closed.' 

But the visible Church consists of wheat and tares ; and 
the Arians would not have accepted the consubstanti^lity of 
the Son, though an angel from heaven proclaimed it. The 
decree of the head of the Church would have sufficed for some 
of these Easterns ; but the decision of the head in conjunction 
with the rest, with the ' conjudication ' of the associated teach- 
ing body, viz. the episcopate, which can never be reduced to 
a mere vicariate of the Pope, would be a stronger argument 
to those who were inclined to resist. It was more imposing, 
and required less faith. Borne and Alexandria had already 
consecrated the term Homootisios to express the faith. It 
was now to be seen in the face of day by an evident and im- 
posing manifestation that there was no place in the Church 
for any who taught the contrary. The bishops, directed from 
Borne, 1 were in the exercise of their prerogative, by the grace 
of their consecration, to proclaim before the world their adhe- 
sion to what, as a matter of fact, had been the teaching of 
the Holy See, and of such bishops as Alexander of Alexandria. 
They did not, as I have said, come to decide an open question. 
The legates (cf. p. 164) came full charged with their master's 
judgment, and the rest of the bishops with the teaching which 
had been theirs all along — they came to proclaim that there 
was but one teaching in the East and West, in the body and 
the head, and that that teaching attributed proper Divinity to 
the invisible Head of the Church. 

So that the palmary instance of history contradicting the 
statement of the Vatican decree 2 is derived from the fact that 
St. Sylvester considered that the circumstances of the case 
demanded the apparatus of a council rather than an ex cathe* 

1 See p. 164. 

* 4 The Nicene Council is the best instance one coulcUake — the best on all 
grounds ' (Bright's Roman Claims, loc. cit,). 




—384 



OF THE CHURCH'S ACTION. 



161 



drd judgment from himself. That is to say that, given Papal 
infallibility, it ought to have been exercised in the particular 
way laid down by these writers ; 1 and since it was not so 
exercised, it could not have been known to the Church ; ' the 
negligence on the part alike of the Church and of the Pope 
was simply treasonable/ In point of fact, St. Sylvester seems 
to have exhibited that genius for government which, it has 
been remarked by an unfriendly critic, is an inalienable in- 
heritance of the occupants of the See of Rome. To bring the 
East into line with the West, he used the instrument of a 
council composed of bishops, mostly Eastern, together with 
his own legates, instead of issuing a fresh decree straight from 
Rome. We do not know what the action of his legates was in 
the council, as the record has perished. We can only judge, 
if we can judge at all, by that of the Papal legates at the 
Council of Ephesus, when we first have a full record of con- 
ciliar action. And in that council their position was one of 
undisputed superiority. 



I. The council, when it met, consisted almost entirely of 
Eastern bishops. Not more than five Western bishops 
attended. There was no need of the presence of more, and 
the assembly would have been indefinitely delayed had the 
presence of others been required. Arianism, as Mr. Allies 
remarks, was an Eastern malady. And it was enough for the 
West that the legates of the Holy See were on the spot, 
bringing with them, as is expressly stated by Eusebius, the 
authority of St. Sylvester. 

The Pope presided by his legates, consisting of Hosius, 
the Bishop of Cordova, in Spain (who had been acting at 
Alexandria * in the affair of Arius, and was the trusted friend 
of the emperor), and two priests named Vito and Vincentius. 
These three signed first, Hosius obviously not in virtue of his 

1 I have quoted only from Dr. Pusey and Dr. Bright ; but the instances in 
which I have noticed the same assumption in Anglican writers are practically 
innumerable. 

* The action of Hosius, a Western bishop, at Alexandria, suggests some 
other than a purely imperial commission. He was probably Papal legate 
throughout the whole affair. 



§ II. — The Council itself. 




162 



HOSIUS PRESIDED 



a.d. 800 



see, but as legate. The two priests signed next, and then 
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. Some writers have en- 
deavoured to evade the force of this fact, by suggesting that 
Hosius was made president, as the emperor's favourite, and 
from general respect for his character. One can hardly sup- 
pose that the suggestion could be due to anything but the 
exigencies of a theory which is opposed to the idea that Borne 
presided. Could anything be more entirely opposed to all that 
we know of the relationship between the greater and lesser 
sees of Christendom than the supposition that the emperor's 
will placed an inferior Western see over the Sees of Rome, 
Alexandria and Antioch ? It is admitted on all hands, that 
long before the Council of Nice the See of Rome was con- 
sidered to be the See of Peter, and we have already seen that 
there is irrefragable proof that Alexandria acted as at least in 
some sense subordinate to Home. It is freely admitted on all 
sides that Home had a primacy of honour by those who deny 
her primacy of jurisdiction. Yet, according to this strange 
theory, her primacy of honour did not involve even the pre- 
sidency at the first (Ecumenical Council. What did that 
primacy of honour involve ? Further, the sees are, even on 
this theory, placed in their usual order after the president's 
signature, viz. first the papal legates, then Alexandria, and 
then Antioch. But we are asked on this theory to believe 
that above these greater sees thus placed in their order, a 
lesser see of the West signed, not as representing the first see 
in Christendom, but as president — Cordova, Borne, Alexandria, 
Antioch, Jerusalem ! 

I have said that this supposed arrangement could only 
have been by the emperor's desire, for it is impossible to 
suppose that Papal legates suggested such an order, or that 
Alexandria and Antioch would otherwise have suffered a 
suffragan of the West to take precedence, when a question as 
to their own jurisdiction over their suffragans was coming on 
for discussion. 

Mr. Puller 1 quotes the case of Marinus, Bishop of Aries, at 
the Council of Aries, who is supposed by some to have presided. 



Prim. 88. p. 148, note 3. 




—884 



A3 PAPAL LEGATE. 



163 



But it is not certain that he did ; 1 and he was the bishop of 
the place, and the council was in no sense oecumenical, but was 
convened under peculiar circumstances (cf. p. 145). Hosius 
was not Bishop of Nice, but of a see in Spain. And is it con- 
ceivable that, if Hosius had acted as president, a lesser 
Western see over all the great Eastern sees, in the East, the 
precedent would never have been quoted ? Gould the Council 
of Chalcedon have blamed Dioscorus for sitting as president 
in the presence of papal legates, by the express order of the 
emperor, at the Bobber Council of Ephesus, and no one have 
pressed the point that at Nice even a lesser Western bishop 
had sat above even Borne, not to speak of Alexandria and 
Antioch ? The idea is so unsupported by any historical 
evidence, that it would have been natural to pass it by, had 
not several recent writers made a chivalrous attempt at 
foisting it into the history of the council. 

It is, then, on the list of signatures alone that such writers 
rely ; it is from the same list that we may derive a sound 
argument for the presidency of the Pope at this council. It is 
not only from the account of Gelasius of Cyzicus that the 
proof is derived, but from the inherent improbability (I had 
almost said impossibility) of the opposite theory, granting the 
accuracy of the list of signatures, which is not denied. These 
lists, referred to by Gelasius, supported by the strongest 
internal probability, and the analogy of the mode of proce- 
dure at subsequent councils, constitute an amount of evidence 
which is opposed merely by the fact that Hosius' name occurs 
first, and the assumption that he signed in his own right. 

And it is necessary also to protest against the idea that in 
this instance Gelasius of Cyzicus may be discarded as of no 
value. 3 Photius of Constantinople, before his fall, bracketed 
Hosius and the two Boman priests as forming the Papal lega- 
tion, quoting Gelasius. And Photius must have been relying 
not only on his own judgment, but also on an Eastern tradition 
to the same effect. But Gelasius of Cyzicus could hardly 

1 Cf. Diet, of Chr. Biog. art. 1 Man no a.' 

* Mr. Gore (R. C. Claims, p. 100, 3rd ed.) altogether fails to appreciate the 
argument derived from the lists of Gelasias. Nearly every assertion which he 
makes in the note, in which he speaks of this subject, may be fairly questioned. 



m 2 




164 



PAPAL JURISDICTION 



a.d. 300 



have created an Eastern tradition. Besides, Gelasius is not 
giving his own authority, which would be of comparatively 
little worth, but professes to be copying from older lists. 
What is the exact authority of those lists no one can say ; but 
Gelasius evidently had some other lists besides the one from 
which Eusebius copies, and they agreed on this point. The 
Eastern tradition in favour of the presidency of Rome at the 
council must have been strong for it to be adopted as it has 
been into the Grseco-Russian liturgy. In the office of St. 
Sylvester the following address to him in reference to the 
council occurs : — 4 Thou hast shown thyself the supreme one of 
the Sacred Council, 0 initiator into the sacred mysteries, and 
hast illustrated the Throne of the Supreme One of the 
Disciples.' Here is the presidency of the Council of Nicaea 
attributed to St. Sylvester, as the successor of St. Peter, * the 
supreme one of the Apostles.' 

That the legates exercised a real influence is involved in 
the statement, made in the same century by St. Damasus 
and a synod of ninety bishops, that the 818 bishops at Nicaea 
were 4 directed from the city of the most holy Bishop of Rome ' 
in the work of the council, whilst the Council of Rome in 
a.d. 485 states that the 318 bishops there assembled 4 referred 
the confirmation of things and the authority to the holy 
Roman Church.' 

II. The official records have perished, probably destroyed 
by the Arians when in possession of the Eastern sees. Hence 
it is not open to argue anything from the silence of the 
bishops on this or that subject. It would be arguing, not 
from the silence of the council, but from the absence of 
records. When Mr. Puller says that 'undoubtedly, 1 if the idea ' 
(i.e. of a primacy of jurisdiction as possessed by the Bishop 
of Rome) 4 had been presented to the synod, and if any claim on 
behalf of the Pope had been urged as of divine right, there can 
be no question that a repudiation of such claim would have been 
made in unmistakable terms,' he is arguing not from history but 
from preconceived ideas. But when he goes on to say, 4 But 
as a matter of fact the claim was not made, and therefore the 
whole conception that underlies the Vatican decrees was 



1 The italics in this sentence are mine. 




—384 



NOT UNDER DISCUSSION, 



165 



ignored/ 1 he first manufactures his history and then makes 
an unsound deduction from his fabrication. How can we say 
that 1 as a matter of fact the claim was not made/ when we 
do not possess a single record beyond the creed and canons ? — 
when, moreover, the learned are not even agreed as to the 
number of canons ? Who has interrogated the Nicene Fathers 
to know what was said, seeing that all documentary evidence 
has perished ? But supposing that the claim was not made, 
how does this prove that 4 the whole conception underlying the 
Vatican decrees ' was 4 ignored ' ? It proves nothing either 
way, unless it can be shown that there was occasion for making 
the claim. But how can we suppose that such a claim would 
come in d propos of the business of the synod ? Surely these 
strong assertions, 4 undoubtedly/ 4 there can be no question/ 
need some other ground on which to rest. The fact that the 
original documents were at some time or other, in the case of 
each of the greater Eastern sees, in the hands of the Arians, 
and the tendency that we know the Arians exhibited to forge 
and mutilate documents, must make us very careful how we 
use even those we do possess. Where great institutions rest 
upon them, where traces of them are found in other writings, 
and when there is corroborative evidence in the West, we 
may trust them. But as to arguing from their silence, and 
calling it 'significant/ one is compelled to say that those 
who build such tremendous issues on such a sandy foundation 
are having recourse to a most dangerous expedient. St. 
Boniface, addressing the bishops of Thessaly, reminds them 
that the Nicene Fathers did not venture to lay down anything 
regarding the See of St. Peter, because they knew that 4 that 
was bestowed by the word of the Lord.' As an hypothesis 
this is equally rational with that of the supreme jurisdiction 
of the Pope having been ignored ; as a matter supported by 
evidence, it has more in its favour than the latter hypothesis. 
The history of matters immediately subsequent to the council 
will show that this must have been the case; for it is not 
reasonable to suppose that St. Julius, St. Liberius, and St. 
Damasus could have acted as they did, if the primacy of 
jurisdiction had been 4 ignored ' at the Council of Nicaea. We 



1 Prim. SS. p. 147. 




166 



BUT IMPLIED 



a.d. 300 



must not take history piece by piece, but trace the continuous 
development of an institution, if we would understand its real 
meaning. 



I. There is, however, one canon which gives us a glimpse 
of the nature of. the Church's government. It ran thus : — 
• The Roman Church has the primacy ' (or, ' Let the Roman 
Church have the primacy,' or, as the true version probably 
runs, 'It is the ancient custom that the Roman Church 
should hold the primacy '). ' Let the ancient customs be main- 
tained, which are in Egypt, Libya and Fentapolis, according 
to which the Bishop of Alexandria has authority over all 
thna* ptecAR, pince this is also customary' (or * there is a like 
custom ') * to the Bishop of Rome. In like manner in Antioch 
and in the other provinces these privileges are to be pre- 
served.' 

As it is disputed by some whether the first clause about 
the Roman Church formed part of the canon, I will leave 
that for the moment as though it did not exist. And I will 
also suppose that the canon ends here, although I think 
there is good reason to suppose that there was at one time 
more in the canon. 

One thing that must strike the most casual observer at 
once is the fact that the Church comes before us after her 
three centuries of persecution with her hierarchy of bishops 
already in order. Three sees come before us with titles to 
jurisdiction already possessed. The council did not originate 
their jurisdiction, and settled not to meddle with it. Their 
words do not even imply that they could. The force of 
ancient custom is too much for them. Whence the ancient 
custom was derived, on what authority it was based, they do 
not say ; we can settle that from other sources. The Sixth 
Canon gives no hint as to whether these customs, all or any 
of them, relied on divine institution or on ecclesiastical agree- 
ment. The three sees that come before us in this important 
canon are the sees of Peter, and their relationships were, 
according to the Fathers of Niceea, of ancient origin. Within 
the jurisdiction of one of these Petrine sees a quarrel had 



§ III.— The Sixth Canon. 





— «84 



IN THE SIXTH CANON, 



167 



arisen. Meletius, an Egyptian bishop, had risen against his 
patriarch (so to call him by anticipation) and formed a schism. 
The council had already dealt with metropolitans; it now 
proceeded to deal with greater metropolitans, 1 those bishops 
who had metropolitans under them. They decide that there 
is nothing to be done but to adhere to the jurisdictional 
extent of the See of Alexandria as it had been mapped out in 
the past. 

II. But the Fathers in this canon give a reason for not in- 
terfering with the jurisdiction of Alexandria. They say that 
the ancient customary jurisdiction of that see should remain 
what it is, ' since [or because, iweiSii] the same is customary 
with the Bishop of Borne. 9 Thus the most marked distinction 
is drawn between the position of Borne on the one hand and the 
great sees of Alexandria and Antioch on the other. Bome's 
cognisance, or Bome's example, whichever be the true inter- 
pretation, is quoted by the Nicene Fathers as determining the 
question of Alexandria's rights of jurisdiction. 3 

If the expression used in this canon — viz. ' since this is 
customary also with the Bishop of Borne ' — means that such 
exercise over other bishops was the custom also with the 
Bishop of Borne, then Bome's patriarchal sway is held up as 
the norm and sufficient justification of a similar authority on 
the part of the Bishop of Alexandria. The council does not 
touch upon the origin or ground of Bome's organisation of 
her jurisdiction. That did not come within its puiview. It 
spoke of her patriarchal sway as settled and as settling their 
own decision (lireiSrji). It has been said that the absence of 
any reference in this canon to the unique and sovereign posi- 
tion of the Bishop of Borne ' is a proof, if proof were wanted, 

1 Cf. Valesvi Observ. in 8oe. et Sos. 8. viii. So Jerome, John Scholasticue, 
Patr. of Constantinople, and Petrns de Marca. 

* Mr. Puller describes the canon as going on 4 to cite the case of the Roman 
Bee as parallel to the case of the Alexandrian See ' (Prim. 8S. p. 145). But 
the canon goes on to cite the parallel case of the Roman See as the ground for 
continuing her rights to Alexandria. This Mr. Puller omits to notice. Mr. 
Gore's summary of the canon is equally misleading : * The Fathers in the Sixth 
Canon recognised in Rome a quasi-patriarchal power in her own region like 
that which they acknowledged equally in Alexandria and Antioch. They 
recognised nothing more ' (R. C. Claims, 8rd edit. p. 96). Barely they sug- 
gested a great deal more when they gave this as the reason for their own action. 




168 



WHICH BASES ITS JUDGMENT 



A.D 800 



that the First (Ecumenical Council knew nothing of the 
doctrine of Papal supremacy.' And the Bishop of Lincoln has 
recently called special attention to this proof, quoting these 
words and saying, * We need to bring our minds to the con- 
sideration of such words.' 1 The same writer (Dr. Bright) 
urges in the previous sentence that since they were touching 
on jurisdiction they were bound to go on and speak of Papal 
jurisdiction if they believed in it. The best answer would be 
to ask, Why ? If that jurisdiction were under dispute, one 
could understand why they ought to have gone on to speak 
of it. If not, there is no conceivable reason why they must 
enter upon such a subject. The proof to the consideration of 
which we are asked 4 to bring our minds ' is of the nature of 
a petitio principii. We may with much greater justice ask 
why the Fathers quoted Bome's relationship to the sees of 
her patriarchate as an adequate reason (hreiSi)) for so all- 
important a decision as that the jurisdiction of Alexandria 
was not to be interfered with. Mere antiquity would not be 
sufficient. The Nicene Fathers were not a body of antiqua- 
ries concerned to preserve the shape of an edifice from mere 
love of the antique. The custom must have been based on 
sufficient authority, and this authority they give — 'since 1 
(that is, because) 4 this is customary to Borne.' The reason 
given suggests that Borne is something more than Alexandria 
and Antioch — nay, than the whole Council of Nice, for Bome's 
action is assumed as the true norm of ecclesiastical govern- 
ment. The council did not confirm anything in this matter 
as a superior court, it only followed custom. It gave nothing, 
except its adhesion to the customary jurisdiction already 
settled. It dealt with Alexandria and Antioch, but only to 
declare the type which Borne had supplied by her action in 
her own neighbourhood to be a sufficient authority. 2 On this 
ground they considered the protesting bishops bound to obey 
their Metropolitan at Alexandria. 

1 Cf . his Preface to The Primitive Saint* and the See of Borne, by Bey. F. 
W. Puller, p. xvi. 

9 This seems to be the view of it taken by the Eighth Gen. Council, actio x. 
cap. 17, but not quite certainly. It is the interpretation given by Nicolas L in 
his letter to the Emperor Michael 




—384 



ON PAPAL AUTHORITY. 



1G9 



HI. I have given this interpretation first because of the 
great authority it can claim. But I cannot conceal from my- 
self that, as compared with a second, adopted by Baronius 
and Bellarmine, it labours under certain disadvantages. In 
the first place it gives, indeed, a reason for the general prin- 
ciple of patriarchal jurisdiction, but not for the particular 
instance ; and it was the particular instance which was the 
point in hand. That is to say, it is not clear how the reason 
given on this interpretation would account for the decision 
that those Egyptian bishops in particular should remain 
under Alexandria. And, secondly, the canon does not, in 
some of the oldest versions, speak of a similar exercise of 
jurisdiction as customary with the Bishop of Rome, but it 
says, ' since this is customary to the Bishop of Borne.' What 
is 'this'? 

Taking the words simply as they stand, the canon may be 
said to assert that the subjection of the Egyptian bishops to 
Alexandria was customary with the Bishop of Rome. That is 
to say, the jurisdiction of Alexandria over these bishops had 
been the arrangement with respect to them recognised and 
acted upon by the Bishop of Rome himself, and that conse- 
quently things must remain as they were. They could not 
interfere with the ancient custom which had been thus recog- 
nised by Rome. The arrangement had been made with the 
cognisance of Rome. We can hardly doubt that the Papal 
legates had been instructed on this question. And they may 
have given the information that the bishops of Rome had 
long ago originated, or arranged, or consented to this juris- 
diction of Alexandria. In this case the Nicene Fathers' judg- 
ment, when they said ' Let the ancient customs hold good, 
Ac.,' would be equivalent to saying, 'Let these bishops remain 
under the See of Alexandria, since this arrangement is of long 
standing, it being customary with the bishops of Rome to act 
upon it ' — as had actually happened in the previous century in 
the case of the bishops of Upper Nubia and St. Dionysius of 
Borne and his namesake of Alexandria. 

On the supposition that the supremacy of the Church of 
Rome was a universally recognised truth, this would be a 
most natural way of speaking. It is here advanced, however, 




170 



THE LEGATES' VERSION 



a.d. 800 



not &b a positive proof of that doctrine, but as a reply to the 
various conjectures on which the writers above quoted rely, 
arguing from the supposed silence of the fragmentary records 
which we possess, and particularly of this canon. The argu- 
ment advanced by Dr. Bright and emphasised by the Bishop 
of Lincoln, to the effect that if the Church had believed in the 
supremacy of the Church of Borne, it must have said so in 
this canon, may thus be met in two ways : first, by insisting 
on the precarious nature of the argument from silence, in 
the absence of the Acts of the Council; and secondly, by 
showing that it cannot be fairly deemed beyond dispute that 
this canon was not meant to give the authority of Borne as an 
all-sufficient reason for these Fathers not venturing to inno- 
vate on the customary relationship of Alexandria to her suf- 
fragan sees. There is, moreover, this indisputable fact, on 
which Pope Nicolas I. laid stress in his celebrated letter to the 
Emperor Michael, that whilst the council described the juris- 
diction, more or less, of Alexandria and Antioch, it did not 
do the same in regard to Borne. Bufinus, indeed, supplies us 
with some information in regard to the patriarchal jurisdic- 
tion of Borne, speaking of the suburbicarian churches, but as 
his interpretation is not generally accepted as part of the 
canon, we cannot say under what form mention was made of 
those churches. 

IV. This whole contention will be greatly strengthened if 
we consider the probability that this canon had for its head- 
ing, or rather, for its first sentence, the words read by the 
Boman legates at the Council of Chalcedon, viz. 'The 
Church of Borne always held [or, Let the Church of Borne 
always hold] the primacy.' 1 Aetius, the Archdeacon of Con- 
stantinople, is supposed to have read out a copy of the canon 
without this heading. But there is no suggestion in the Acts, 
as we have them, that this was by way of contrast to the 
legates' version, which came from Lilybaeum. It is hardly 

1 The full reading is very likely ' Let the ancient custom remain that the 
Church of Borne should/ <fcc. (cf. Vincenzi, De Sacrd MonarchiA Hebr. et 
Christianorum). Canon Bright is hardly fair in saying 'the Prisca Yersio 
tries to blend the original with the Boman gloss.' The Prisca Versio is a real 
authority, and from an old Greek version. 




—884 



AT CIIALCEDON, CORRECT. 



171 



conceivable that he should have read this canon at all ; for 
each side was asked to read the canons on which they relied. 
The Papal legates relied on that portion of the Sixth Canon 
which places Alexandria and Antioch, and not Constantinople, 
next to Borne ; the Easterns relied on the Third Canon of 
Constantinople. Aetius probably read this alone, and not the 
Sixth Canon, which carried on the face of it his condemnation 
— in fact, the bishops' resolution had departed from the canon 
which Aetius did read, being, as Dr. Bright euphemistically 
phrases it, ' more astute than candid/ 1 or, as we might put it, 
somewhat dishonest. The imperial commissioners, in sum- 
ming up, decided that from all that had gone before it was 
clear that Borne held the primacy, but as that was not the 
point in question, they proceeded to the subject of Constanti- 
nople's place in the order of sees. 

The occurrence of this Sixth Canon in what the Arch- 
deacon of Constantinople is supposed to have read, is probably 
due to the copyists, one of whom put the Sixth Canon in the 
margin, and another eventually introduced it into the text, a 
most frequent mode of corrupting the text, as all textual 
critics are aware. 

So that, so far from the legates' version of the Sixth 
Canon read at Chalcedon being a forgery, 1 it is probably the 
insertion of the other version which is, I will not say a forgery, 
but an error in the transcriber. 3 

Thus the Council of Nicaea, as a whole, suggests the unique 
position of the Bishop of Borne as something more than that 
of the Duke of Norfolk to the rest of the English peerage. 4 
It does not discuss Papal jurisdiction ; for, on the hypothesis 
of its truth, it would be beyond the province of a council to 
enter upon such a question, which neither was, nor could be, 
submitted to its consideration. It did not speak of Papal 
infallibility ; it had met together to show that the teaching 
of the West was also the teaching of the East, to express the 

1 Canons of the First Four General Councils, 1892, p. 223. 

* As the Bishop of Lincoln, Dr. Bright, and Mr. Puller assert (of. Prim. 
88. Preface, p. zzi.). 

* For a further treatment of this subject, of. infra, on the 28th Canon. 

* The simile selected in Prim. SS. 




172 



NO ACTS EXIST. 



a.d. 300—884 



unity of the teaching Church, and to settle a question of the 
first importance in regard to jurisdiction in the East, in the 
settlement of which it alleged the practice, or the cognisance, 
of the Bishop of Borne as its sufficient warrant for adhering 
to the long-established relationship between Alexandria and 
its suffragan bishops. It cannot be too often repeated, in 
view of the argument from silence, that the Acts of the Coun- 
cil are not forthcoming, having been, it may be, destroyed by 
the Arians when in possession of the Eastern sees. And 
besides the work of destruction, these heretics were busy in 
the work of forgery. Consequently, we have to be careful 
about arguing from what we do possess, and still more careful 
about arguing from what we do not possess. It is not until 
we come to the Council of Ephesus that we are able to see the 
Church in conciliar action in the comparative daylight of 
anything like adequate records. 1 

1 I do not forget St. Athanasius' work on the Deorees of the Nioene Synod ; 
but that does not validate the argument from silence. 




CHAPTER XII. 



THE POPBB THB GUABDIANS OF THE NICBNE CANONS. 

After the Council of Nicsea it seemed as if the Church had 
entered upon an era of triumph. But one catastrophe changed 
the whole face of things. A bishop with Arian sympathies 
gained the ear of Constantino, and henceforth the whole 
weight of imperial influence was brought to bear upon the 
establishment of heresy. St. Athanasius seizing, as he once 
did, the bridle of the emperor's horse, and insisting upon his 
abating his opposition to the Catholic Faith, but in vain, was 
a symbol of what was going on. Constantine was persuaded 
that he was enforcing the Nicene Faith ; and Eusebius was 
victorious all along the line, in both mounting himself, from 
throne to throne, in the teeth of Nicene regulations, and in 
deposing the orthodox bishops. And the weapon that he vic- 
toriously opposed to the Council of Nice was a synod convoked 
by the emperor. 1 It was a line of action to be repeated in 
the history of the Church — viz. a synod of bishops, under the 
influence of the Crown, deciding as to the government of the 
Christian Church. And it entered upon the platform of 
Church history under the patronage of the deadliest foe that 
the Church has ever known. It was the darling project 
of an Arianising emperor under the influence of an Arian 
bishop. In this case, however, the bishop was the foe, the 
emperor the instrument. It was not yet the theory of the 
independence of National Churches, but it was akin to it, and 
its natural parent. The supremacy of the Crown was ousting 
the supremacy of the Holy See. Imprisoned or exiled bishops 
in communion with the See of St. Peter (reminding us of 

1 For an interesting expansion of this, see The Throne of the Fisherman, by 
T. W. Allies, ch. vi. 




174 



SAINT JULIUS THE POPE 



a.d. 300 



events in the sixteenth century) were the immediate result of 
the alliance between Church and State which sprang up 
through the wily machinations of Eusebius, Bishop first of 
Berytus, then of Nicomedia (when the Court was there), and 
lastly (on the Court's removal), Bishop of Constantinople. In 
concert with the emperor, the whole constitution of the 
Church was soon further assailed by the attempt of Eusebius' 
successors to base the jurisdiction of patriarchs, not on their 
connection with Apostolic origin, but on the secular position of 
their city. It was the world against the Apostle ; the crown 
against the crozier; Caesar usurping the prerogatives of 
Peter. Constantinople, but a few years ago, was a spot all 
but unknown, whose bishop was suffragan to the Bishop of 
Heraclea. Now it was New Borne, and its bishop aspired to 
be a second Pope. The Pope was the successor of St. Peter, 
and therein his strength lay; but that Apostle had selected the 
centre of the world for the base of his operations, and as the 
centre had shifted, why might not the new imperial city be 
also the centre of a new patriarchal jurisdiction ? The answer 
was, that Peter, not Ceesar, is the governor of the Christian 
Church. 

And under the difficulties which now emerged, in some 
•sense the greatest that the Church had as yet had to meet, the 
government of Peter became the salvation of the Faith of 
Nicsea. As the Church entered upon her new course of 
alliance with the State, the Eastern bishops more and more 
discovered a fatal weakness incident upon their proximity to 
the new centre of secular power on the shores of the Bosphorus. 
On the other hand, the genius for government and the inherent 
strength and majesty of the Holy See became more and more 
pronounced, under circumstances of unparalleled difficulties. 
It is evident that the full meaning of the Nicene canons could 
only gradually make itself felt ; and the same is true of the 
guardian of those canons, viz. the Apostolic See. The history 
of this eventful period is orientated by a remark made by St. 
Gregory the Great in reference to a later Bishop of Constanti- 
nople : 1 As to what he says, that he is subject to the Apostolic 
See, I know not what bishop is not subject to it, if any fault be 
found in bishops/ When 1 fault is found in bishops ' then 



Digitized by 



—884 



ASSERTS HIS JURISDICTION 



175 



the primacy develops its stores of wisdom and authority to 
correct the fault. This is precisely what happened in the 
post-Nicene period. Until then, as Mr. Allies points out in 
his 'Throne of the Fisherman/ 1 bishops had not learnt to 
struggle with one another for place and power, and the need 
of a head was not so keenly felt. But when ambition came 
to curse the East, then came out to view the controlling power 
of the Sovereign Pontiff. 

This, then, is the salient feature of the next fifty years 
after Nicaea, viz. the Holy See ' confirming the brethren ' 2 in 
the East. The Court bishop in the East was the new factor 
in the Church's life and the source of unceasing trouble. Court 
and bishop together did their best to deprave the Church's faith. 
They must have succeeded but for the unbending firmness of 
the Holy See, for a council could not guard its own canons. 
So far the Apostolic tradition had been guarded by the See of 
Borne ; and now the position at once occupied by that see, 
when the Fathers of Nicaea had dispersed to their various 
homes, was precisely that of guardian of the Nicene inter- 
pretation of the Apostolic tradition against refractory and 
Erastian bishops. The government of the Church was, in 
fact, not merely episcopal but apostolical; episcopacy was 
unequal to the strain that ensued, but the Holy Apostolic 
See gave strength to the episcopal brotherhood. 

It was in the course of the struggle that now ensued between 
Catholic and Erastian bishops that St. Julius, the reigning 
Pope (who, after the short reign of St. Mark, had succeeded 
St. Sylvester, the president of the Council of Nicaea), wrote a 
letter of even exceptional importance, which has been fortu- 
nately preserved to us by the care of St. Athanasius. This 
letter has an important bearing on the Nicene canons ; it is 
quoted at length by St. Athanasius, and it affords irrefragable 
witness to the existence, in the Nicene period, of the entire 
claim on the part of Borne to a divinely instituted authority 
over East and West alike. It has, moreover, in view of modern 
discussions, the advantage of having been protested against by 
those who were opposed to the Nicene Faith. And yet its 



1 Ch. *i. 



* St. Lake xxii. 32. 




176 



OVER ALEXANDRIA, 



a.d. 800 



author, St. Julius, was canonised by the Church, and his 
name figures in St. Athanasius , life and writings as the great 
defender of the faith. 1 

His letter, which St. Athanasius gives with obvious approval, 
deals with a canon drawn up by a synod of Eastern bishops, 
which was meant to silence St. Athanasius himself. The 
Emperor Constantius, listening to the falsehoods by means of 
which theEusebian heretics succeeded in deposing Athanasius, 
Eustathius, and Paul, the orthodox bishops respectively of 
Alexandria, Antioch, and Constantinople, had assembled a 
council of bishops at Antioch, who passed the following 
canon : — 1 A bishop who has been deposed by a council may 
not resume his office, nor be restored by any subsequent 
council, if, after his deposition, he has dared to execute 
ecclesiastical functions.' The canon was specially aimed at 
St. Athanasius, who had been ' deposed * by the Council of 
Tyre, and after his return from banishment had zealously 
resumed his work as bishop. This Council of Tyre was an 
assemblage of bishops presided over by the Arian emperor, 
determined to oust St. Athanasius from the See of Alexandria, 
and the Council of Antioch had thus stamped this synod 
with the character of finality. ' But/ says Socrates, ' Julius, 
Bishop of Old Rome, was not there, nor did he send a repre- 
sentative, although the ecclesiastical canon expressly commands 
that the Churches shall not make ordinances contrary to the 
judgment of the Bishop of Rome ' (ii. 8). And Sozomen says 
(iii. 10): 'Julius wrote that they had acted against the canons 
because they had not called him to the council, the ecclesiastical 
canon commanding that the Churches ought not to make 
canons beside the will of the Bishop of the Romans.' 

They had chosen to have their own council under the 
emperor in isolation, although, as Theodoret says, ' Pope 
Julius, adhering to the law of the Church, both commanded 
them to repair to Rome and summoned Athanasius to trial ' 
('H. E.' ii. 4). 'Both they and we were summoned/ says 
St. Athanasius himself. 2 

1 Mr. Puller, in his Primitive Saints, dc. p. 138, has nothing to say against 
St. Julius. He even calls him saint, a title which he denies to every other 
Pope in that century. * Apol c. Arian. n. 1. 




ST. ATHANASIUS APPROVING. 



177 



These bishops, then, averred that the decision of the 
Council of Tyre should not be subject to appeal, on the ground 
that it was a council of bishops under imperial leave. It was 
on this point that the Roman Pontiff at once joined issue in 
his celebrated letter preserved by St. Athanasius. In the 
course of that letter he accuses these bishops of violating the 
discipline of the Church. They had condemned the Bishop of 
Alexandria, St. Athanasius. But 'why/ asks St. Julius. 
* was nothing said to us about the Church of Alexandria in 
particular? Are you ignorant that this is customary, for 
word to be written to us first, and then for a just sentence to 
be passed from this place ? If, then, any suspicion rested 
upon the bishop there, notice thereof ought to have been sent 
to the Church of this place [i.e., Borne] ; whereas, after 
neglecting to inform us, and proceeding on their own authority 
as they pleased, now they desire to obtain our concurrence in 
their decisions. . . . Not so have the directions of the Fathers 
prescribed. This is another form of procedure, a novel prac- 
tice. . . . What we have received from the blessed Apostle 
Peter, that I signify to you/ 1 

It was, then, according to St. Julius, a novel practice in 
the middle of the fourth century for a council of bishops to 
proceed to censure the second Petrine See, that of Alexandria, 
on their own authority, instead of obtaining a just sentence from 
Rome. The latter, he says, was the usual course, sanctioned 
by antiquity. And the authority thus to decide was, he adds, 
derived to Borne from 1 that which we have received from the 
blessed Apostle Peter.' And this was under the very shadow 
of the Nicene Council. To this the reply of the Eusebian 
heretics was that 1 it was not his [Julius 1 ] province to inter- 
fere.' The Eusebians, in their endeavours to overthrow the 
Nicene faith as to our Lord's Divinity, adopted the programme, 
as we learn from St. Hilary, that things settled by a council 
in the East should be simply accepted by the West, and vice 
vend. It was all important for their cause that they should 
not be interfered with by the unyielding orthodoxy of the 
Apostolic See. They did not dream of a province settling 



1 Athan. HUt. Tract., Lib. of Fathers, p. 56. 



N 




178 



THE SARDICAN CANONS 



A.D. 8QO 



such things all by itself, without any communication with the 
rest, not even if the whole East were to be called one province 
— that would have been to rend the Church in twain — but they 
did hope to withdraw themselves from any active intervention 
on the part of Borne, such as had hitherto obtained as a 
matter of course. But, as we have just seen, both Socrates 
and Sozomen — Eastern historians — and Theodoret and St. 
Athanasius (by implication) speak of the idea of canons being 
made without the concurrence of the Bishop of Borne as 
unheard of up to that time. But what is still more important 
is that the Council of Sardica (if the Sardican canons were 
really passed by that Council) or the Nicene canon itself (if the 
Rardican canons are really Nicene) condemned the Eusebians 
in this their endeavour to settle matters of high importance 
without reference to Borne. It will be necessary, therefore, to 
devote our attention to the canons which go by the name 
of Sardican. 

§ II. — The Sardican Canons. 

I have elsewhere 1 shown that it is quite possible that 
these canons represent actual decisions of the Nicene Fathers ; 
but whether this be so or not, they certainly embody the mind 
of the Church in the fourth century. Only seventeen years 
after Nicsea St. Julius could speak of the ' custom ' of referring 
judgment on the Bishop of Alexandria to Borne as one of 
the directions of the Nicene Fathers, with the approval of 
St. Athanasius, himself Bishop of that Eastern city. 

Let us, then, waiving the question as to whether they are 
actually, or only virtually, Nicene — passed, that is, at Nicaea, 
or an accredited appendix to that council, passed at Sardica— 
examine their witness on the subject of appeals to Borne. 

Three are of special importance in relation to this subject. 

I. Canon Three decides against bishops passing from pro- 
vince to province, 1 lest we should seem to close the door of 
charity.' If this were Sardican, it may have had special 
regard to Eusebius, who had passed from Berytus to Con- 
stantinople ; if Nicene, it may have been concerned with his 
passage from Berytus to Nicomedia, where he was 

1 Cf. Appendix II. 



Digitized by 



Google 



—384 



CONDEMN IMPERIAL 



179 



when the Council of Nicsea sat. The canon farther provided 
that in the event of a bishop having a 1 case * against another 
bishop the metropolitan should convene a provincial synod. 
If the accused lost his case he was not to be allowed simply 
of himself to appeal to some neighbouring bishops, as was the 
tendency , but if he wished it, an appeal was to be arranged 
for him, and in the same region. There is no question here 
of appeal to Borne in the full technical sense. But ' Julius, 
the Bishop of Borne ' (if that be the true reading— for some 
copies have ' Sylvester,* which would be the true reading if 
the canon was Nicene in its origin), was to be asked to settle 
the judges that should form the new synod, if it was thought 
well for the case to be reheard. In deciding this, which 
consisted in asking Borne to select the judges, the unusual 
formula adds as a reason, ' Let us honour the memory of the 
Apostle Peter.' Supposing this to be Sardican, it would con- 
tain a judgment upon the Council of Tyre. The irregularity 
of that council consisted in the fact that not only did the 
emperor call a council without consulting the Holy See, but he 
actually selected the judges. The Greek historian Socrates 
says of the Council of Antioch : ' Julius, Bishop of Old Borne, 
was not there, nor did he, indeed, send a representative, 
although the ecclesiastical rule expressly commands that the 
Church shall not make canons without the consent of the 
Bishop of Borne ' (ii. 8). It is difficult to suppose that Socrates 
refers to anything here but a canon of Nicaea. But be 
that as it may, the device of the Eusebians was a radical 
innovation on the constitution of the Church. Had such a 
course been permitted, Arianism, which was so successful in 
attracting to itself first Constantine, and then, still more 
decisively, his son Constantius, would have gained the day. 
Had it been allowed to the emperor to convoke councils for 
cases of appeal, without reference to the Holy See, as Con- 
stantine had done in the case of Tyre, and Constantius in the 
case of Antioch ; had it, moreover, been permitted to the 
Crown to appoint the judges, the most fundamental feature 
of the polity of the Church would have been destroyed. It 
would have ceased to be Apostolical in its government ; and, 
when the empire was separated into various nations, each 



N 2 




180 



AND WELCOME PAPAL 



a.d. 300 



tribe would have had its own independent national Church. 
The theory of independent national Churches would have 
become a fact, the unity of the Church would have disappeared, 
and the guardianship of the holy faith been rendered im- 
possible. No wonder, then, that the Sardican Fathers, if the 
canon was theirs, determined still to honour the memory of 
the Apostle Peter ; or that the Nicene Fathers (whose canon 
we may suppose it to represent) in view of fundamental 
principles necessary in the immediate future, rather than of 
such bitter experience as the Sardican Fathers would have 
had, said amongst themselves, ' Let us honour the memory of 
the Apostle Peter,' in the future as in the past ; and that the 
African Fathers, in this their commentary recorded these 
utterances of Nicene Fathers used in the discussion about 
the canon. 

II. Canon Four deals with appeals to Eome. What was to 
happen in the case of bishops who, having lost their cause in 
the second court, had thence appealed to Rome? Their 
see must not be occupied by another. This was a matter 
which the Nicene Fathers could easily foresee would be 
likely to happen in the future, or if the canon be Sardican, 
this had already arisen ; and here it is no longer the informal 
utterances of members of the council, and the particular 
occupant of the Holy See is no longer mentioned. It is now 
simply ' the Bishop of Eome.' 

III. Canon Seven, again, deals with the case of a bishop 
who, having been condemned in the court of first instance — 
viz. the synod of his province — appeals, without recourse 
had to a second synod, straight to Eome. It will then, ac- 
cording to the canon, belong to ' the Bishop of Eome ' to say 
whether he thinks it is a case for revision ; and if he decides 
in the affirmative, it will rest with him either to remit the case 
to the bishops of the province adjoining that in which the 
condemned bishop lives, or to send a legate a latere, who 
can undertake the case, either by himself or in conjunction 
with the bishops of the neighbouring province. 1 

1 I have here adopted Jungmann's interpretation of these canons in pre- 
ference to Hefele's. The Ballerini have an invaluable dissertation on the 




—884 



INTERVENTION IN 



181 



IV. Now these canons obtained reception eventually in the 
East as well as (at once) in the West. They were, strangely, 
unknown in Africa during the first part of the fifth century ; 
but the African bishops were in a small minority, and the 
canons were eventually incorporated even in their African 
code. They must, therefore, be admitted to represent the 
mature judgment of the Church, or, to be more accurate, the 
matured expression of her mind. Men cannot put themselves 
back into the beginning of the fourth century, and into the 
position of some African bishops (for the evidence is against 
St. Augustine having refused to receive them when fully made 
known) ; they cannot adopt as the basis of their permanent 
position an episode in the life of one portion of the Church 
which did not represent its maturer thought — they cannot, I 
say, do this — which is what some have claimed to do, and 
then call themselves by the name of Catholic. 

Constantinople and Alexandria, although their (probably 
corrupted) copies of the sixth Nicene canon did not contain 
these said provisions, had not a word, so far as history tells 
us, to say against the justice of the regulations contained in 
these canons ; whilst they certainly incorporated them even- 
tually, as did Africa herself, into their code. 

And yet these canons suppose a mode of unity which is 
irreconcilable with any but the Papal form of government. 
They barred the possibility of independent national Churches. 
They nipped that natural tendency in the bud. They do, 
indeed, condition appeals to Borne, but they assume their 
necessity. They do not inaugurate them. In neither of 
these canons is the question entertained as to whether there 
ought to be appeals at all. They suppose that there will. 
The third canon does not deal with appeals to Rome at all — 
in the strict sense of the word, it only provides for requests 
to Borne for the selection of judges in a fresh local court of 
appeal. Hence all that has been said about the words 1 Let 
us honour the memory of the Apostle Peter' inaugurating 
appeals to Borne falls to the ground. 

subject in their unrivalled edition of St. Leo's letters, but Jungmann's treat* 
ment leaves nothing to be desired (Diss, Hist. Eccles. vol. ii. pp. 15-27. 
Ratisbon, 1881). 




182 



OASES OF APPEAL. 



A..D. 800 



V. Bat even if this canon could be proved to deal with 
direct appeals to Borne, it would be flair to argue that the 
memory of the Apostle Peter may be just as much honoured 
by adhering to an old custom as by a new arrangement. 
That is to say, the words do not indicate a novelty. And the 
defence which has been set up, that the canon specially 
mentions Julius by name, and that therefore the arrangement 
applied to him personally, and to him alone, in his lifetime, 
fails to account for the previous words, ' Let us honour the 
memory of the Apostle Peter.' It is as successor of Peter 
that Sylvester or Julius is to be asked to appoint judges ; and 
Julius' successors were, equally with himself, the successors of 
the Apostle Peter. 

But the fourth and seventh canons do deal with the subject 
of appeals to Borne, and in them, at any rate, the name of 
the Pope is dropped, and the general term for the office is 
used. 

Whether, then, Nicene or Sardican — whether already in 
existence or soon to be passed, these canons bear out the 
statement of Julius to the Eusebians that they had offended 
against the established order of the Church in not recognising 
that, in the case of ordinary bishops, the appeal lay eventually 
from East to West, and that in the case of the Bishop of 
Alexandria the appeal lay straight to Borne. 1 

Before passing on, it may be well to notice a fallacy con- 
cerning the relationship of the Popes to the canons. It is 
often said that, for instance, St. Leo denounced the third 
canon of Constantinople on the ground of the Nicene canon, 
and it is suggested that this is a sign that he could not fall 
hack on his own authority simply. 2 But the obedience to the 
Nicene canons, and indeed to other canons of the Church, 
which the Popes professed, was an act of natural justice, not 

1 Dr. Bright lays stress on the fact that St. Julias uses the word ' all/ say- 
ing that the Eusebians should have written to * all of us.' But the word 4 all ' 
i bviously means all those bishops who were then in Borne, of whom there were 
weral from all parts. And the sequence of the letter, which contends that, in 
accordance with the rule of the Church, they should specially have written to 
Home about Alexandria, establishes the principle of Rome's relationship to 
her, viz. that of judge. 

2 Bright's Hist of the Church, p. 417, 3rd edition. 




—884 



WHY POPES QUOTE CANONS. 188 



submission to a superior power. The canons that they 
guarded, and by which in many matters they considered 
themselves strictly bound, were passed by themselves or by 
their predecessors, through their assent and confirmation. 
They were not, therefore, a hyper-Papal power, ruling the 
Popes themselves, for they acquired their force from the 
Popes. They were, therefore, bound by them in the same way 
that a king is bound to respect the laws where they affect his 
conduct, not because they are superior to him, but because he 
is bound by the natural and divine law to set the example. 
As Bt. Ambrose said to the Emperor Valentinian, 1 What you 
have prescribed to others you have prescribed to yourself, 
for the emperor passes laws which he should be himself the 
first to keep.' 1 And Theodosius and Valentinian themselves 
say, * It is worthy of the majesty of him who reigns to profess 
himself bound by the laws.' 2 The Popes could dispense from 
the observance of the canons, as St. Leo dispensed Maximus 
of Antioch from the results of an irregular ordination, and 
the council received him as bishop avowedly on the ground of 
the Papal dispensation; 3 but they were bound, in natural 
justice, or in supernatural charity, not to dispense without 
legitimate reason. When, then, a Pope quotes a Nicene canon 
as the ground of obedience on the part of others, he does 
not place the canon above himself, but avows his natural 
obligation to follow in the footsteps of his predecessors, unless 
cause can be shown why he should in a particular case 
allow others to withdraw themselves from the operation of the 
general rule. 

Note. — That the third Sardican canon does not relate to appeals 
to Borne is proved by the facts that the original judges, not the 
guilty party, are to write to Borne, and that this canon was not 
mentioned in the discussion between St. Zosimus and the African 
bishops as to the best mode of procedure in regard to appeals. 

In the fourth canon it is to be noted that the effect of the 
appeal to Borne is suspensive. The bishop is spoken of as seeming 

1 Ep. 32. ad Valent. 

* De Leg. it Const (L i. Cod. tit. 14) : 1 Digna vox est majestate regnantis, 
lagibns obligatum se profited.' 

• Cf. p. 435, ia/ra. 




THE SAKDICAN CANONS. 



a.d. 800—384 



to be deposed, not actually deposed, until Borne has spoken. There 
is nothing here about the case being heard in the region in which it 
arose. It was obviously to be heard at Rome. 

The seventh canon contemplates another quite different case, 
and one in which the case tods to be heard in the provinoe. Mr. 
Puller appears to have blended them into one ; hence his idea that no 
cases were to be carried to Rome (« Prim. SS.' p. 168). But the 
seventh canon deals with the case of a bishop passing by the regular 
stages of appeal, and hence the provision that the case should go 
back to the province, and not to Rome, as Canon Four implied. 1 

For the witness of Photius to the reception of these canons in 
the East see Appendix II. ad finem. 



1 Cf. Jungmann, loc. tit 




CHAPTER Xffl. 



THB REIGN OF LIBEBIUS. 



§ I. — His Perianal Grandeur. 



I. More than half a century elapsed before the second oecu- 
menical council met, and even this was not convoked as such, 
for the ordinary government of the Church does not lie with 
general councils, but with the bishops in union with the Holy 
See. It was to Borne that men looked in the anguish of those 
days, and not to general councils. In one sense, indeed, the 
eyes of all were for a while turned to the great Bishop of 
Alexandria; but St. Athanasius himself looked to Borne. 
Had the government of the Church rested with independent 
National Churches, or with an East independent of the West, 
the Church must have sunk under the Erastianism of imperial 
Christianity, and the restless activity of Eastern speculation 
would have wrecked the faith. 

Constantius, one of the most dangerous foes that the 
Church has had, could deal with the fickle, quarrelsome, over- 
subtle Eastern mind ; but with the West and its determined 
adherence to the Nicene settlement, and its consciousness of 
strength in the possession of the Apostolic tradition, he could 
do nothing. His success against Athanasius was at one time 
terrible ; it was only checked by one obstacle — he could not 
gain the occupant of the Holy See. That see was occupied 
by one whom the Greek menology in its calendar of saints 
calls ' the blessed Liberius, defender of the truth/ and he 
threw the shelter of his impregnable position round the 
Bishop of Alexandria. The heathen historian Ammianus 
Marcellinus tells us how this one exception meant every- 
thing, and how the emperor could not rest satisfied whilst 
he had left one stone unturned to win the Boman Pontiff. 




186 



LIBERHJff LAPSE 



k.v. 800 



Liberius had succeeded Julius. The latter had consoli- 
dated the work of the Nicene Council by his brilliant and 
persistent justification of Athanasius. Liberius received the 
mantle of Julius, and like Julius stood on the rock of Apostolic 
tradition. He could say, 1 Never was it my own statutes, but 
those of the Apostles which I guarded and carried out.' 1 

Constantius, accordingly, set to work to win Liberius, 
which St. Athanasius says would have been equivalent to 
winning the whole Church to his side. But neither threats 
nor bribes availed to move the aged pontiff. Firm as a rock 
he went into exile, ' the admiration of all,' in the words of 
Athanasius. St. Jerome's account, if genuine, is plainly 
inaccurate, and in direct contradiction to that of St. 
Athanasius ; for according to St. Jerome — if (I repeat) that 
passage is genuine — Liberius, before he set out, signed an 
heretical formula. We may dismiss this as certainly untrue. 
He went forth, says St. Athanasius, 1 the admiration of all.' 

H. What he did towards the end of his two years' exile 
and ill-treatment we shall never know. We know from Sozo- 
men that the atmosphere was thick with Arian calumnies, 
and that these calumnies did not spare the Pontiffs. In this 
case it would seem that calumny, which loves to shoot its 
arrows in the dark, availed itself of a period in the life of 
Liberius of which we have no authentic information, to sug- 
gest that his return from exile was due to his having signed 
against Athanasius. The formula he signed has never been 
produced, nor can anyone say what it was. Forgery has been 
busy about it; for all accurate writers now admit, as Canon 
Bright does in the second edition of his ' Church History,' 
that the ' Fragments of Hilary,' on which the accusations have 
mainly rested (as for instance in Dr. Pusey's 4 History of the 
Councils '), are, at least in great part, spurious. The passage 
in St. Athanasius' 1 Apology,' on which Mr. Gore relies, does 
not speak of a fall, but merely of Liberius not having com- 
pleted his term of exile. The passage in the ' History of the 
Arians • was written before the supposed fall took place. And 
Father Bottalla, S.J., has completely demolished the idea that 



1 Bp. ad Constant, n. 8. 




—384 



NOT PROVEN. 



187 



St. Athanasius added it afterwards. 1 Even if it were genuine f 
it denies that the incident in Bercea counted for anything. And 
there are, besides, these facts, that neither Socrates nor 
Theodoret alludes to the passage, although they had St. Atha- 
nasius* work before them as they wrote; that Nicephorus 
Gallistus, whilst following Sozomen in his account of matters 
up to this, drops him here ; and that Eufinus, though ' with 
his bark full of malice,' as St. Jerome describes him, was 
unable to find a reason in St. Athanasius' works for the 
return of Liberius, which confirms the idea that the passage 
was not at that time to be found in those works. 

As for St. Jerome's witness, those who take their stand on 
this cannot take it as it is, but are obliged to correct it on one 
point, which opens the door for a further correction, viz. the 
excision of the rest, which has no contemporary evidence in its 
favour. The fact is, that St. Jerome is to be revered for his 
knowledge of Holy Scripture and his eminent sanctity, and 
as a witness to the Church's teaching ; but in matters of his- 
tory he is sometimes at fault. 2 Sulpicius Sever us, Socrates, 
and Theodoret are more to be relied on, when they agree ; and 
they agree in knowing nothing of any fall of Liberius. And, 
further, the passage about Liberius does not occur at all in the 
famous manuscript of St. Jerome which the Queen of Sweden 
gave to the Vatican, and which belongs to the sixth or seventh 
century. 

There is, however, another form of evidence which needs 
to be emphasised. There was in the time of Liberius an 
active correspondence carried on by the bishops all round. 
They speak of the councils held, the professions of faith 
adopted, the zeal of some bishops, the defection of others. 
There is mutual encouragement and sympathy in the 
distresses of the times ; but there is no mention, no distant 
allusion, to any idea of Liberius, the Pope, having subscribed 
a suspicious formula or condemned Athanasius. And yet the 
principal events of the time were known to these numerous 
bishops. There is also correspondence between Liberius and 

1 AutoriU du Pape, vol. i. pp. 239-41 (1877). 

* It is quite another matter to set aside hiB teaching as to the faith, as Mr. 
Gore and Mr. Puller do. 




188 



HIS STAND 



a.d. 300 



Athanasius, but no consciousness of injury in the past nor 
demand for renewed affection in the future. 

No, What Liberius did sign for certain was all in support 
of Athanasius, What he did sign, as matter of history, was the 
condemnation of the heretical Councils of Tyre, Aries, Milan, 
Ariminum ; he did sign the confirmation of the Catholic Synods 
of Rome and Alexandria. The authentic acts of his pontificate 
include a definition of the Divinity of the Third Person of 
the Holy Trinity ; the reconciliation of the Macedonians ; the 
mission of Eusebius of Vercell®, and of Lucifer of Cagliari to 
the East ; the nomination of Elfidius as legate to Sclavonia ; a 
letter of congratulation and encouragement to the bishops exiled 
for the faith, as well as general decrees touching the attitude to 
be maintained towards the penitent signatories of Ariminum. 1 

III. But one of these episodes in the life of this great 
Confessor for the faith deserves further mention, for it stands 
on a level with that described by St. Athanasius, and it 
entitles him to be considered the special instrument of the 
great head of the Church for 4 confirming the brethren ' at this 
eventful period of her history — I mean his action in regard to 
the Council of Ariminum. 1 

More than 400 bishops assembled there. The legate of 
the Holy See presided at the opening. It had all the 
conditions of an oecumenical council so far ; it would only 
need the final confirmation of the Roman Pontiff. It began 
well with excommunicating the heretics that were troubling 
the Church ; but its numbers after an interval, at the 
emperor's command, fell off as it continued its sessions, 
and its end belied its beginning. The legate of the Holy See 
withdrew, and the bishops, whose number was still very 
considerable, were induced to send deputies to the emperor 
who were completely overawed by the imperial presence. So 
great was the heretical emperors anxiety to force them into 
accepting a semi-Arian programme, that although engaged for 
the onerous ceremonies of initiating new consuls on the 
following day, he sat up through the greater part of the night 
occupied with pushing on the signatures to the heretical 

1 Rsvus des Questions Historiquts, vol. L, art. • St. Liberius.' 




—384 



WHEN OTHERS FELL. 



189 



creed. The bishops of the East in the simultaneous Council 
of Seleucia were equally pliant to the emperor's mission. 
Eventually, scarcely more than eighteen or nineteen bishops 
in Christendom remained uncompromised. It was then that, 
in the language of St. Jerome, ' the world found itself Arian, 
and groaned.' The faith had suffered an eclipse in the 
episcopal body. Who was to save the position ? It fell to 
the lot of one man to stand in the breach — and that man was 
Liberius. The aged pontiff had once said to the emperor, in 
his memorable interview with his Majesty at Milan (when told 
that on that occasion, too, he would stand alone), 'If I am 
alone, the faith will not fail.' He knew himself to be the 
Atlas whom our Divine Lord had appointed to bear the world 
of Divine Revelation on his shoulders, on which the govern- 
ment of the Church had been laid. Another occasion for 
proving the truth of his courageous utterance had now come. 
Liberius found himself alone face to face with the triumphant 
Arians, who had overreached the Catholic episcopate at 
Ariminum and Seleucia. He saved the situation. In the 
tremendous troubles that beset the East, which led St. Basil to 
appeal so earnestly to the West for help, St. Damasus was 
able to point out to the Eastern bishops that 'he whose 
judgment was to be looked for before all others' had deli- 
berately refused his assent to the Ariminian formula. 1 The 
three illustrious exiles, Athanasius, Eusebius, and Hilary, had 
not signed, and the bishops who had been entrapped, as 
St. Damasus explained, in the East and West, by the wary 
formula, were with them in heart. But the express repudia- 
tion of the formula rested, for the moment, with Liberius, 
and Liberius did not fail. He authoritatively rejected the 
proposed formula, and, in so doing, unchained afresh the 
emperor's wrath. He had once more to leave his beloved 
Borne — whether for the Catacombs or at a greater distance is 
not certain — but only to return and erect, through the devotion 
of his orthodox flock, the Basilica of Santa Maria Maggiore, 
and to receive the retractation of the penitent signatories of 
Ariminum, as one who had himself never failed. 



Cf. infra, p. 209. 




190 



HIS MEMORY CHERISHED 



a.d. 800 



Such was the second Pope after the Nicene Council — ' the 
most blessed bishop Liberius,' according to St. Basil; 'the 
Pontiff of blessed memory/ according to St. Epiphanius; 
'the great Liberius, the most holy Liberius/ according to 
Cassiodorus, and ' in all things most renowned ; 9 ' the thrice 
holy bishop/ according to St. Ambrose ; and, in the words of 
Theodoret, 'the illustrious athlete for the faith.' In the 
Menology of the Greeks, he is a saint distinguished as ' the 
blessed Liberius, the defender of the truth/ ' whose zeal for 
the orthodox faith caused him to undertake the defence of the 
great Athanasius.' His exile is there related, and his return, 
but not a whisper of any defection, the account ending with 
saying that ' he died at Borne, after having governed his flock 



But I am anticipating. Liberius had the conduct of 
another affair, which ended less happily. 

I. After the disaster at Ariminum — when the whole body 
of bishops, saving a few great saints such as Athanasius and 
Basil in the East, and the Sovereign Pontiff in the West, had 
yielded to imperial pressure and signed a semi-Arian confes- 
sion — the Church seemed likely to receive still heavier blows 
at the hand of the new emperor, an apostate from the faith. 
But it was Julian's policy to let the bishops slaughter them- 
selves by intestine divisions; and, accordingly, they were 
allowed to return from their various places of exile and re- 
sume their episcopal duties. 

Liberius, ever foremost in the faith, at once entered upon 
the work of pacification and ecclesiastical discipline. He pro- 
ceeded to lay down the rules by which the Church should be 
guided in reconciling those who had in any way compromised 
themselves by complicity with the manifold forms of Arianism. 1 
Antioch was naturally one of his chief cares ; and he influenced 
and authorised the great Bishop of Alexandria to convene a 
council to consider the position of affairs in that central see 
of the East. The council at Alexandria adoped the rules laid 



well/ 



§ II. — The Meletian Scandal at Antioch. 



1 Cf. Acta Sanctorum (Bollandiet), Sept. 23, § 195, 6, 7. 




—884 



ST. MELETIUS AT ANTIOCH 



191 



down by the Sovereign Pontiff, 1 and did its best to conciliate 
the differences that divided the Catholics at Antioch. 

The origin of these differences was as follows. St. Eusta.- 
thius had been exiled from Antioch through the influence of 
the Arians. Amongst other things they had suborned a 
woman to asperse his moral character, who afterwards con- 
fessed her perjury. After his death, Meletius had been 
elected bishop under circumstances which rendered his 
appointment open to serious objection. He had been to some 
extent 4 led astray by the stranger's hand/ to use St. Gregory of 
Nazianzus* expression— i.e. he had coquetted with Arianism. 
According to the Arian historian Philostorgius, he had 
* feignedly professed the heterousion.'* According to Socrates, 
he had signed the semi- Arian profession of faith put forth at 
the Council of Seleucia. 3 According to St. Epiphanius, he 
belonged to the party of Acacius, which, if true, was a most 
serious blot on his life. 4 According to Nicephorus Callistus, 
he had been originally elected to the bishopric of Sebaste 
through the suffrages of the Arians. 6 Sozomen said that he 
was returned by the Eudoxians, the most thorough-going 
Arians. 6 The See of Antioch being vacant, through St. 
Eustathius' death, he was promoted to that important post. 
According to St. Jerome, he was ' transferred to Antioch by 
the Arian bishops Acacius and George.' But it seems that 
St. Eusebius of Samosata was assured of his having embraced 
the orthodox faith. St. Eusebius was perhaps, as Bollandus 
thinks, the instrument of his conversion. His change was 
kept a secret from the Arians, but known to a certain number 
of Catholics in Antioch, who in consequence voted along with 
the Arians for his appointment to the see. In view of 
what might happen, when his conversion became known, 
the Catholics had a written document drawn up concern- 
ing his appointment by the Emperor Constantius, which 

1 CI. Letter of St, Athan. read at the second Council of Nicaea (Mansi, torn. vii. 
col 75, 6), in which he says of the provisions for the restoration of the lapsed : 
rovra «a2 Jr 'Ptfytp iypd^ni «a) &tcW£oto q 'Pufiaivv 4#c*Aij<rfa (cf. Acta Sanctorum, 
Ice. cit. 201). They seem to have been drawn up in Rome, and sent by Euse- 
bius to the Synod of Alexandria. 

■ Eccl. Hut. v. 1, 5. * Hist. Eccl. ii. 44. 

• Bar. lxxiii. 25, 6. 1 Hut. Eccl. ix. 48. 6 Hist. Eccl. iv. 25. 




192 



EliECTED BISHOP 



a.d. 300 



St. Eusebius afterwards refused to resign into the hands of 
the Arians. 

This appointment of St. Meletius was a clear misfortune 
to the Church. Saintly as he proved to be, full of zeal and 
of most gentle, winning ways, his election was, nevertheless, 
the occasion of a separation between the Catholics of Antioch 
which lasted more than eighty years. 1 The sound body of 
the Church,' says Theodoret, ' was divided into two.' 1 The 
Catholic bishops who, for the occasion, combined with Arians, 
could not free the election from the stain of complicity with 
these great foes of the orthodox faith. To understand, then, 
the Antiochene troubles of that century aright, it is necessary 
to bear in mind that St. Meletius entered upon his episcopate 
at Antioch under false pretences, and that the irregularity of 
his election could only be set right by some higher ecclesias- 
tical authority. 2 

Meanwhile a numerous party of Catholics in Antioch, in 
horror at the idea of having a bishop who, however recom- 
mended by personal holiness, had yet ascended the throne 
under such sinister influences, refused their allegiance to 
Meletius. They chose for their leader a priest, named Pauli- 
nus, of irreproachable life and unimpeachable orthodoxy, 
and nothing would induce them to accept the ministrations 
of Meletius. Meletius, on gaining the see, had, indeed, at 
once openly avowed his belief in the Homoousion, and 
engaged the Arians, who procured his election. He was 
forthwith driven into exile, and so became a confessor for the 
Catholic faith. But even this did not satisfy this fervent 
body of Catholics under Paulinus, who had kept themselves 
during all those years that intervened between the exile of 
Eustathius and the election of Meletius from all complicity 
with Arian worship. It had become the fashion to mix with 
Arians in divine worship to aim^xtent which their more 
zealous orthodoxy could not brook. It was with these, and 
these alone, that St. Athanasius, when he went to Antioch, 

1 Hist. iii. 4. 

* The account of the Meletian troubles in Primitive Saints and tlie See of 
Rome (pp. 163-176 and p. 238 seq.) fails in accuracy from losing sight of this 
point. The narrative on p. 163 is altogether misleading. The writer alto 
neglects to give proper stress to the ruling of the Council of Alexandria. 




—384 



THROUGH ARIAN INFLUENCE. 



193 



communicated ; and this great doctor of the Church interested 
himself in gaining for them a church of their own. Tillemont 
suggests that it was a penance which St. Meletius had to bear 
for his unfortunate antecedents, that he never enjoyed full 
communion with Borne, nor with the great saint of Alexandria. 
Even in the great sermon which St. Meletius preached as 
soon as he had succeeded to the throne of Antioch — holding 
up first three fingers, and then one, to signify his belief in 
the Eternal Trinity — there were expressions which St. 
Athanasius would not have sanctioned, and which St. Epipha- 
nius considered to be open to objection. His actual orthodoxy 
had by no means established itself in men's minds, as is 
shown by the various reports which St. Jerome mentions and 
(according to St. Epiphanius) wrongly credited. 

The people of Antioch were now divided into three. St. 
Meletius' followers, of course, separated themselves from the 
disciples of Euzoius, the Arian bishop, whom Constantius had 
intruded after the exile of Meletius, and for this they were 
praised by St. Gregory Nyssen as keeping themselves free from 
spiritual wandering. 1 They went and worshipped apart from 
the Arians in a suburb, in a church called the Palaea. As 
long as those set over them were professedly orthodox, they 
had worshipped with them ; but now that a declared Arian, 
like Euzoius, was set over them by the emperor, they 
separated and preserved their spiritual chastity. Those who 
acted with Paulinus were often called Eustathians, from the 
last unquestioned bishop, St. Eustathius. They had a real 
grievance in the unfortunate election of St. Meletius, and, 
moreover, are thought by some to have had questionings as to 
the validity of the baptisms amongst the Meletians. 2 But their 
fundamental difficulty was the election of Meletius; 3 they 
were otherwise at one in doctrinal teaching. As Theodoret 
says, * The sound body of t^ Church was divided into two 
parts.' 4 And so high did Paulinus stand in the esteem of all, 

1 Oral. Fun. in Melet. It was not for keeping aloof from the Paulinists, as 
Mr. Puller (Primitive Saints, dc. p. 166) applies his words. The phrase 
iwiX'tfHio would not apply to Paulinos, and the whole sentence implies a long 
interval before Meletius' second exile. This could only apply to a time before 
Paulinos had been consecrated. 

* Socr. ii. 44. » Niceph. Call. iz. 48. « Hut iii. 4. 



O 




194 



THE COUNCIL OF ALEXANDRIA 



a.d. 800 



that he was never interfered with by the emperor, nor spoken 
of disrespectfully by his adversaries; he and his flock also 
worshipped by themselves. The parties of Meletius and 
Paulinas held together in some sort of ecclesiastical inter- 
course. St. Meletius deposed before Sapor that ' their flocks 
held intercourse in religion,' and St. Meletius held that those 
who worshipped with Paulinus, after the latter had been made 
bishop, were under legitimate authority. ' You have received 
the care of the rest,' are his words to Paulinus. 1 

II. Such was the state of affairs with which the Council of 
Alexandria had to deal. Liberius had sent his legates, Euse- 
bius of VercellaB and Lucifer of Cagliari, now freed from exile, 
to assist in the composition of the Oriental differences. Their 
conduct throughout suggests that they were not simply acting 
on their former legatine faculties, as De Marca and Thomassin 
thought ; they seem to have been entrusted afresh by the 
Apostolic See with po^yera of extraordinary jurisdiction and 
authority in the East. 2 Western bishops could not have 
acted as they did, on their own authority, without protest 
both from the East and from Rome. But Liberius had pre- 
viously joined Eusebius on to his legates to Constantius, and 
two letters are extant from the same Pope to Eusebius, in one 
of which he speaks of his legate having ' in no way de- 
viated from the fellowship of the Apostolic See/ 3 It is, 
therefore, reasonable to suppose, seeing that he acted with 
authority, that he was in possession of fresh legatine faculties. 4 

The council, then, ' few in number, but of sound faith, 
and many in merits,' as Eufinussays (lib. i.e. 28), with the 

1 Theodor. Hist. iii. 4. Mr. Puller's account of the position, in Primi- 
tive Saints, dc. ch. iv., is irreconcilable with St. Meletius' statements in Theo- 
doret. Theodoret's statements are not always to be trusted, but in this matter 
his leanings would prejudice him against the position which he here assigns 
to the flock of Meletius. 

» Cf. Vita S. Liberii (Stilting, S.J.), Acta Sanctorum, Sept. 24, § 202. 

* Const. Ep. Ziiberii, iii. v. vii. 

4 Rufinus' statement that the legation was enjoined on Eusebius and 
Lucifer by the Alexandrian Synod could only mean, if it is not a slip, that the 
synod determined the special form which their general authority should as- 
sume. For Alexandria had not the jurisdiction over Antiooh that would be 
implied ; and, indeed, Lucifer did not go to Alexandria at all (cf. Stilting's S. 
Liberius, § 202, Acta Sanct. Sept. 24). 



Digitized by 



—884 



HELD PAULINUS TO BE 



195 



Papal legate presiding together with St. Athanasius, 1 followed 
exactly the rules for reconciling those who had tampered with 
the orthodox faith which had been drawn up and received at 
Rome, 8 and it applied the principles thus settled to Meletius 
and his friends. The ordination of Meletius was dealt with, 
and not rejected. This we learn from the Seventh General 
Council (a.d. 787), in which the history of the matter is thus 
succinctly given : — (1) The holy Meletius was ordained by the 
Arians ; (2) he ascended the ambo and proclaimed the Homo- 
ousion ; (8) the ordination was not rejected. 3 

So far, then, the scruples of the party of Paulinus were in 
the way to be removed. They could look on the irregularity 
of St. Meletius' ordination as having been purged by proper 
authority. The way was cleared for his acceptance as sole 
bishop, if the two parties agreed. But an event occurred 
which altered the whole position of things, and henceforth 
constituted the difficulty of the situation. 

After the council, some bishops who remained in Alex- 
andria drew up a letter in the name of the council, written, 
it would seem, by St. Athanasius, and obviously with the 
council's consent. This letter was addressed to Eusebius, 
Lucifer, Asterius, Cymatius, and Anatolius, and was also 
written in the name of Eusebius himself, amongst others, as 
having previously given his consent, and being now about to 
execute its decrees. But — and this is a point of the last im- 
portance — it was also signed by the two deacons of Paulinus. 
Now this involved a decision on the part of the council that 
the see of Antioch was vacant, until Meletius' ordination was 
in a manner validated, and he, or some one else, was chosen 
as bishop of the whole body of the orthodox. 4 The alterna- 

1 ' Interf ait et profait Concilio Alexandrino com Athanasio,' Life of Euse- 
bius from the Archives of Vercelli, published under the authority of his suc- 
cessor, St. Honors t us. Cf. Acta Sanctorum, May 20 ; S. Lucifer, o. v. 45. 

* Speech of Sabas (Mansi, torn. vii. col. 75). 

* From St. Athanasius' letter to the Emperor Jovian it is evident that 
Liberius had dealt with the matter of the lapsed bishops before the Council of 
Alexandria met. Letters had come from Gaul and Britain. Cf. also the 
Council of Paris, which proves that the Council of Alexandria was not waited 
for in the West as the initiator. 

* He was acknowledged as a bishop, but the bishop had yet to be chosen. 



o 2 




196 



THE NUCLEUS OF THE CHURCH 



A.D. 800 



tive would be, that Paulinus was himself bishop. For these 
deacons could only appear as legates, either as commissioned 
by a bishop or on the ground that they represented the pres- 
byterate in the vacancy of the see. Baronius thinks that 
Paulinus was already known to be a bishop, and that his 
election was thus acknowledged. But it seems certain that 
this was not the case. The see, therefore, was considered 
vacant until, as a first step, Meletius' irregular consecration 
was formally condoned by a council, in which the Papal 
legate sat. 

But the most important point follows. The letter signed 
by the legates and sent from Alexandria gave directions to 
the commission (of which the legates formed a part) as to 
what should be done at Antioch. ' Call to yourselves all who 
wish to be at peace with us, and specially those who meet in 
the Palaea : ' i.e. the Meletians. They were amongst those 
who presumably wished to be 'at peace with us/ and the 
deacons of Paulinus were amongst those who thus spoke. The 
followers of Paulinus were therefore the nucleus of the 
Catholic Church. 1 But, further, these commissioners were, 
' as teachers and guardians/ to ' embrace all such/ and they 
were to ' join them 9 (i.e. the Meletians and others) 1 to the 
party of Paulinus, well beloved of us.' Again, then, the party 
of Paulinus was treated as the nucleus. And further, 
1 Demand of them nothing more than to anathematise the 
Arian heresy, and to confess the faith professed by the Fathers 
at Nicsea, but also to anathematise those who say that the 
Holy Ghost is a creature, and separate from the substance of 
the Christ/ 

Twenty years were to elapse before the Council of Con- 
stantinople was to meet and testify to the Eastern reception 
of this latter dogma ; but, in spite of this, it was already a 
matter of faith that the consubstantiality of the Holy Ghost 
was contained in the Nicene Creed. That is to say, all that 

1 Cf. Mr. Puller's contention that the Meletians were the nucleus of the 
Church. An expression of St. Basil's (mistranslated, as it seems to me) cannot 
be placed over against the definition of this council sitting avowedly as judge 
in the matter ; yet the position assumed in The Primitive Saints and the See 
of Borne involves the preference of the former to the council's judgment. 




—384 



AT ANTIOCII. 



197 



the Council of Constantinople was about to declare was 
already taught under anathema. Liberius had already issued 
an authoritative decree on the subject. 1 This, however, by 
the way. 

The Acts of the Council of Alexandria were eventually 
taken by E use bins and Lucifer to Borne and submitted to the 
Pope, who confirmed and approved them. 8 

The point, however, that particularly concerns our present 
purpose is that the Synod of Alexandria emphatically en- 
dorsed the action of Paulinus and his party. It also relieved 
them of the difficulty of accepting the ministrations of Mele- 
tius, whilst it recognised the Eustathians under Paulinus as 
the really orthodox party. It is hardly possible to exaggerate 
the importance of this synodical decision. Had Mr. Puller, 
in his ' Primitive Saints and the See of Borne,' given to it its 
due weight, the whole of his contention about Meletius must 
have been seriously affected. 3 He would hardly have given 
us to understand that the Church of England is prepared to 
sink or swim with the orthodoxy and Catholic position of the 
Meletian party at Antioch from the beginning. He would 
hardly have drawn a parallel between the followers of Pau- 
linus and the present Church of Borne in England on the one 
side, and the followers of Meletius and the Church of Eng- 
land on the other. What conciliar judgment with Papal 
legates has validated the election of Archbishop Parker? 
And what comfort is to be drawn from the fact that the 
followers of St. Meletius were told by St. Athanasius and the 
Alexandrian synod to join themselves to Paulinus and his 
disciples ? 

But, further, the Council of Alexandria entreated the 
episcopal commission at Antioch not to insist on any other 
conditions, in the case of those who assembled at the Palaea, 
and also bade the party of Paulinus to put forth nothing but 

1 Socrates, Hist. Eccl 

1 OL Papebroch, Vita S. Luciferi, o. v. 46, Acta Sanctorum, 
• Pp. 165-7. He seems to have been misled by the Benedictine editor of 
St. Chrysostom, whose words he quotes as his authority ; bat the Benedictine 
editor is more cautions than Mr. Puller : he only speaks of the endeavour of 
St. Athanasius, and in terms more capable of being reconciled with the facts 
than are Mr. Puller's, taken with their context 




198 



LUCIFER, TIDE LEGATE, 



A..D. 800 



what was put forth at Nic®a. Moreover, it decided that the 
question of the Three Hypostases, as between the East and 
West, was one of terms only ; and it recommended that they 
should all meet together at the customary place (not at the 
Palaea) and settle the future place of divine worship accord- 
ing to the wish of all. 

III. Thus the peace between the two parties seemed in a 
fair way to be concluded by legitimate authority. A council 
of Alexandria had, of course, no sort of right by itself either 
to purge the election of a bishop in Antioch of its irregularity 
or to settle matters in general for the great Oriental see by 
an episcopal commission, much less to elect a new bishop. 
And yet it seems as though the commission were to superin- 
tend this also, in case the Catholics in general should not 
select Meletius. 1 But the council was acting with the Papal 
legate ; * and the legate Eusebius proceeded to execute his 
commission in conjunction with his brother-legate, Lucifer of 
Cagliari, who was already on the scene. It was, however, 
owing to the precipitate action of this latter bishop that the 
proposals of the council fell to the ground. 

On arriving at Antioch, after leaving Eusebius to proceed 
to Alexandria, according, it would seem, to their mutual 
arrangement, Lucifer, having sent some one to represent him 
at Alexandria, found both parties without a bishop. Meletius 
had not returned from exile, and the Eustathians had only 
the priest Paulinus to lead them. From all we know of St. 
Lucifer, 3 his whole soul would go forth towards the Eusta- 
thians, or party of Paulinus. They had never compromised, 
and he was uncompromising to a fault. They had never 
worshipped along with Arians, and his horror for the Arian 
heresy was unbounded. They had stood the brunt of the 
battle ; their fiery zeal for the proper Godhead of their cruci- 
fied Lord had stood the test of thirty years. All the exquisite 
beauty of Meletius' character could not now tempt them to 

1 Cf. Acta Sanctorum : S. Lucifer, May 20, o. 5. 
» Ibid. Vita 5. Liberti, § 195, 6, 7. 

* Tillemont is mistaken in supposing that the Luoiferians were so called 
because they followed Lucifer into schism ; they were disciples of his who went 
beyond him after his retirement. His retirement was not a schism. 




—384 



CONSECRATED PAULINUS, 



199 



condone the irregularity of his election, and his still (as they 
deemed it) too tender dealing with the Arian heresy. St. 
Lucifer accordingly decided to use his papal faculties, as be 
deemed it certain that anyone who was on the scene would 
feel justified in doing. He determined to act before the re- 
turn of Meletius, and, assisted by two bishops, 1 he conse- 
crated Paulinus, against whose character for orthodoxy and 
personal holiness no whisper had ever been heard, and who 
had been selected as leader, rather than thrust himself for- 
ward. But St. Lucifer had not counted on the devotion of 
the people of Antioch to the person of Meletius. St. Gregory 
of Nazianzus, the panegyrist of St. Meletius, thus describes 
the Btate of matters in his eloquent discourse on peace : — 
' Since, being men, we are liable to sin, our fault was that of 
loving our pastors to excess, and that we could not discover 
which of two good men was the more to be preferred, until we 
agreed to admire them both alike.' 8 He emphatically denies 
that there was any difference as to doctrine, in spite of St. 
Basil's assertion to the contrary. He says to the heretics : 
' However much you may desire it — i.e. to find a quarrel 
between us as to doctrine — it is in vain ; " besides this there 
is nothing" — i.e. nothing but undue attachment to our 
several pastors.' 

IV. The commission of bishops, with Eusebius at its head, 
now arrived in Antioch with their peace-making programme, 
only to find that the proposals of the Synod of Alexandria 
had been rendered futile by Lucifer's hasty action. The 
Eustathians were devoted to their new bishop, and delighted 
to find that their principles in the past had received the 
sanction of Borne and Alexandria. The Meletians, on the 
other hand, were not unnaturally sore at the new conse- 
cration, devoted as they were to the gracious and winning 
personality of the bishop, whom they had with such question- 
able diplomacy helped to the throne of Antioch. Eusebius 
was naturally disappointed with his brother-legate. If 

1 Cf . Jerome, Chroniccn, and Tillemont, Luc. de Cagl. iv. 

* An endeavour has been made to connect this with another passage 
in St. Gregory's life. With what success of. Merenda, De Vita et Oestis 
Daman, c. 18, § 2. 




200 



WHICH PROLONGED 



a.d. 300 



Bufinus' account be taken literally, he refused to communi- 
cate with either party. But considering that he is found 
shortly afterwards in close co-operation with Lucifer, before 
the latter shut himself up in Sardinia, we must understand 
Bufinus to mean that he did not decide as to the legitimate 
occupant of the see. Of course, if St. Lucifer had held no 
legatine faculties, and if the jurisdiction of Borne over Antioch 
had not been acknowledged on all Bides, the case would have 
been simple enough. His consecration of a bishop in Antioch 
would have been a flagrant act of schism. Neither St. Atha- 
nasius nor St. Gregory, nor even St. Basil, could have spoken 
and acted as they did, unless they recognised the right of the 
Apostolic See to consecrate a Bishop of Antioch. They must 
have called it what it would have been, the most monstrous 
act of interference with the rights of Antioch. But they 
betray no distant consciousness of any lack of validity in the 
appointment on the score of the consecration. All that St. 
Basil, the most determined opponent of Paulinas, resented 
was that his friend should be ousted. All he pleaded for was 
that he should not be ignored. All he determined was to 
communicate personally with Meletius, of whose orthodoxy 
he was sure, and not with Paulinus, about whom he thought 
Borne had been misled. He had against him in this 
St. Athanasius and the Council of Alexandria, who had 
thoroughly investigated the question, besides St. Epiphanius 
(no mean authority), some eighty Egyptian bishops, and the 
entire West. But he declares that if anyone should come 
from heaven itself, and yet should be demonstrably not walk- 
ing according to the sound word of faith, he would not com- 
municate with him — an innocent resolve, which is that of 
every Catholic at this hour. 

Eusebius, on arriving at Antioch, expressed his disapproval 
of Lucifer's action, and yet felt himself unable, with his 
present powers, to make any amicable settlement of the diffi- 
culty. It was the orthodoxy of the Eustathians, and the 
sanction given to their position by the Council of Alexandria, 
that constituted the difficulty. For, although the council 
purged the election of Meletius of its original stain, it 
had made Paulinus and his party the nucleus of Catholic life 




-884 



THE RUPTURE. 



201 



round which the Meletians were to gather, and over which it 
was hoped St. Meletius would be chosen to preside by the 
spontaneous action of the whole Catholic body. But now 
that Paulinus had been (however unwisely) ordained by one 
who had authority to act in the name of the Apostolic 
See, and had been enthusiastically accepted by the orthodox 
Eustathians, there was, on the one hand, a difficulty in ignor- 
ing him, and, on the other hand, the impossibility of making 
him the only bishop. There is no parallel in the history of 
the Church to the state of things which thus arose in Antioch. 
And, accordingly, Eusebius, declaring it ' wellnigh incurable,' 
seems to have left Antioch without coming to any definite 
conclusion. He probably felt that the thing must work itself 
out, and that meanwhile he could only have recourse to 
Borne. Thither, with Lucifer of Cagliari, after transacting 
other business elsewhere, he appears to have taken the de- 
crees of the Alexandrian Synod for the confirmation of Libe- 
rius and his account of what had happened in Antioch. 1 

The further development of the matter belongs to the 
reign of Damasus. 

Note. — It will be seen from the facts adduced above that Mr. Pul- 
ler in his book 4 The Primitive Saints and the See of Rome/ has given 
a version of the history of St. Meletius which is inconsistent with 
the facts of the case as a whole. He has ignored the real character 
of St. Meletius' election. He has misrepresented the judgment of 
the Council of Alexandria. He says, 'it recommended that the 
whole body of Catholics should unite together,' a whereas it said 
that the Meletians should unite themselves to Paulinus and his 
party. He is wrong about Lucifer having * immediately afterwards ' 
broken away from the Church. It is, to say the least, a moot point 
whether he ever broke away ; it is certain that he did not imme- 
diately afterwards. Paulinus was not ordained by Lucifer without 
assistant bishops, as Mr. Puller states. There is no discussion 
(which was at least needed, if not an admission) of the legatine 
position of Eusebius and Lucifer. Consequently his readers would 

1 ' Tolerant secam Aota Concilii ambo Legati et in Latinnm transtulerunt 
et K™"*™ portaveront ad Liberium, qui omnia oonfirmavit et approbavit ' ( Vita 
Eusebii ex Archivio Verccllensi). * P. 166. 




202 



ST. MELETIUS. 



a.d. 800- 384 



gain quite a false idea, if they trusted to the version he gives, of 
the whole affair. There are other points in his account which will 
come under notice later on. 

It will be seen also that Dr. Pusey's assertion, quoted by the 
Bishop of Lincoln (Preface to ' Prim. SS/ p. xxiii), viz. ' St. 
Meletius, even while president of this second General Council, was 
still out of communion with the West,* is not borne out by the 
facts of the case. 




CHAPTER XIV. 



ST. DAM ASUS — THE CHAMPION OF THE ' CON SUBSTANTIALITY ' 



I. Liberius having attained to his reward, the great Dama- 
sus sat on the Fisherman's throne. Ozanam, in his graphic de- 
scription of the Church in the following century, says that 
until the accession of Leo the See of St. Peter had been 
occupied by saints and martyrs rather than by what we 
should call men of genius, and that in St. Leo the Church 
salutes the first genius in a Pope. There is some truth in 
this. The foundations of the Church's order were certainly 
laid by the hands of saints in the first three centuries, and, 
as we have seen, their normal end was the martyr's death. 
Indeed, the Popes being the infallible guardians of Divine tra- 
dition, there was, if we may so say, a certain fitness in their 
being conscientious even to sanctity, rather than learned in 
the world's judgment ; zeal for the faith — that divine love of 
truth which will not brook or comprehend in the Church's 
net the teacher of false doctrine — is what we should most 
expect in the early occupants of that see which was set for 
the preservation of the deposit of revealed truth. And such, 
as a matter of fact, was the characteristic feature of the early 
Popes. 

But in St. Damasus we have something more than this. 
He was a man of learning as well as of piety ; a patron of 
art as well as a master of the spiritual life. ' Rarely, if 
ever, in the history of the Church ' (says Dr. Lightfoot), 1 has 
a great leader been fired with such zeal for recording the 
Christian heroism of the past.' 1 He was, moreover, a man 
of prodigious activity, and at the same time of singular 

1 Apostolic Fathers, Part I. < St. Clement of Borne,' vol. ii. p. 444. 



OF THE HOLY GHOST. 




204 



THE CHARACTER 



a.d. 800 



caution. He was too, says St. Jerome, ' the virgin Doctor of 
the virgin Church. 9 But although St. Jerome implies that 
there was an ascetic side to his life, he seems to have en- 
deared himself to every class of men. He was called by his 
schismatic opponents 'the friend of diggers,' in allusion 
doubtless to his familiarity with the workers in the cata- 
combs and their affection for him ; he was called the friend of 
matrons, doubtless in allusion to the fact that the Eoman 
matrons saw in him an embodiment of true religion, and 
lavished their wealth on his schemes for the improvement of 
the city (of which the traces remain to-day), or for the better- 
ment of the poor, or the improvement of the condition of the 
clergy. To Saint Athanasius, who must have known him well 
during his stay in Borne, he was the ' beloved Damasus ; * in 
Theodoret's eyes, looking at him from a distance, he was 
the reproduction of the great Bishop of Carthage, and ' con- 
spicuous for the sanctity of his life.' 1 The emperor soundly 
scolded St. Damasus' schismatic opponents for disturbing the 
calmness of his ' most holy mind.* St. Ambrose, who knew 
him personally, speaks of him as ' the holy Damasus elected 
by the judgment of God.' Few characters come before us 
with more manifold recommendations than that of Damasus. 
His poems are at once scholarly and touching. What can be 
more exquisite than his poem on Projecta, what more touch- 
ing than that on his sister Irene, whom he hopes to meet in 
a better world, and by whose side he asked to be buried ? 
Half his life, he says, has gone from him on losing his sister 
in her twentieth year : 



But Damasus was above all a ruler. He ascended the 
throne at a time when firmness and prudence were, above all 
things, necessary ; and the Sixth General Council is witness 
to the one, when (with a play on his name) it calls him 4 the 
adamant of the faith,' * whilst Theodoret says that ' there 
was nothing that he was not prepared to say and do in behalf 
of the Apostolic teaching ; ' 3 and St. Basil is a reluctant wit- 

1 H. E. v. 2. 

* Adpwos 6 Mi&nas rijs wlcrcuf (Man si, t. xi. p. 661). ■ H. E. v. 2. 



Non timui mortem cobIob quod libera adiret, 
Sed dolui f ateor consortia perdere vit®. 




—384 



OF SAINT DAMASUS. 



205 



ness to his caution in dealing with the East. Ambrosiaster, 
bearing witness to his official position (in spite of his own 
Semi-Pelagianism), really describes the main feature of his life 
when he speaks of the Church as ' the house of God, of which 
Damasus is now the ruler.' But though a ruler, he was, to 
those who knew him, meek and gentle ; St. Jerome, his inti- 
mate at one time, was particularly impressed with his mild- 
ness ; and the title, ' Servant of servants,' which he adopted, 
which has been used by the Popes ever since, points to his 
humility. His position was one that needed this pivot of the 
Christian life, for on the one hand no man was ever more 
maligned by his enemies, idolised by the Christian world, or 
placed on a higher pinnacle by the policy of a Christian 
emperor. 1 It is not without special interest that to him also 
we owe the recitation of the Gloria after each Psalm in the 
divine office; whilst, above all, it is to his desire and en- 
couragement that one of the greatest gifts of God to Holy 
Church is to be traced — the translation of the Holy Scriptures 
into what we may call the vulgar (or common) tongue of 
Christendom by St. Jerome. 

It is to be regretted that some recent writers have taken 
the side of schismatic and heathen authors, rather than that 
of the contemporary Christian world, in regard to this great 
Pope. Dr. Littledale has a passage on Damasus which re- 
produces the venom of the ' Libellus Precum,' written by two 
bitter schismatics, whose statements have been proved, where 
they could be checked, to have been shamefully false ; 2 and 
more recently Mr. Puller has argued from the surroundings 
of the saint, and from a passage from Ammianus Marcellinus, 
the heathen historian, to the effect that St. Damasus must 
himself have been guilty of a luxurious mode of life. 3 Does 
Mr. Puller think that at a time when the throne of Peter was 

1 What is the real value of the saying of Prsetextatus (quoted by Mr. Puller 
as evidence of Papal luxury), ' Make me Bishop of Borne, and I will become a 
Christian to-morrow ' ? A Hindu might say the same to the Archbishop of 
Canterbury — would it be any reflection on his Grace ? Tertullian says that 
the heathen said the same of Christians in his day : which destroys Mr. Puller's 
application (Apol. p. 134). 

■ He quotes them alone as his authority* 

• Primitive SS. pp. 140, 141, 




206 



HIS PREVIOUS LIFE. 



a.d. 300 



taking the place of the altar of Victory, a pagan historian 
would be a stranger to the seductive whispers of envy ? Is a 
pagan historian to be trusted altogether in regard to the very 
Pope who, at the risk of his life, gave the death-blow to 
paganism in the city of Rome, and conspired to destroy its 
last altar ? No doubt it would be something in favour of Mr. 
Puller's thesis if it could be shown that pure worldliness led 
to the position which the throne of Peter occupied in the days 
of Damasus ; \ but we need something more than the sugges- 
tions of a heathen historian, and a petulant expression that 
fell from the pen of St. Basil, writing to an intimate friend, 
to counterbalance the unanimous witness of the contemporary 
Christian world in favour of the ' virgin Doctor of the virgin 
Church,' 2 

St. Damasus had a good preparation for his life's work. 
He must have seen St. Julius and conversed with St. Atha- 
nasius, and he was the secretary of St. Liberius. He followed 
the latter, part of the way at least, out of the city when he 
went forth an exile for the faith ' to the admiration of all,* as 
St. Athanasius describes him ; some think, but without suffi- 
cient ground, that he followed him to Beroea. He at one time 
managed the ecclesiastical affairs of the city in the absence of 
Liberius ; and he had a great deal to do (under the latter and 
in concert with Hilary, of Poictiers) with the restoration of 
the bishops who had lapsed at Ariminum. He was therefore 
a special object of aversion to the Luciferians, in whose eyes 
a moment's dallying with heresy was an unpardonable sin. 
These same men were probably the authors of the calumnies 

1 Cf. Primitive SS. pp. 140, 1. On p. 136 Mr. Puller says that Valen- 
tinian's edict • had to be publicly read in the churches of Borne.' Damasus 
himself adopted this unusual course in his zeal for the reformation of his clergy- 
Mr. Puller's account of the bishops of the fourth century (p. 134, seq.) needs to 
be checked by the facts given by Thomassinus, Disc. Eccl. t. ii. part. ii. lib. Hi. 
cap. 101, and a grand passage in Ddllinger's Hist, of the Church, Period II. cap. 
v. § 1 : * The word bishop was synonymous with just and upright administra- 
tion of the law.' 

* St. Jerome, Ep. ad Pammachium. Ammianus Marcellinus laid stress 
upon the gorgeous attire in which St. Damasus appeared in public and con- 
trasted it with the robes of bishops in the country. Leo XIIL also wears 
the most gorgeous official robes, and yet he almost lives on air 




—384 



HIS ELECTION. 



207 



both against Liberius and Damasus. 1 But no accusation 
could be successfully manipulated against the faith of Dama- 
sus ; for there was no occasion (as in the case of Liberius) 
when he was removed from public ken, and when their 
calumnies could escape unchecked. But, in concert with the 
Jew Isaac, they attacked his moral character ; only, however, 
to draw from all sides fresh witnesses to his sanctity. 

II. When Liberius died, Damasus was his natural and 
fittest successor. He was immediately elected by the vast 
majority, and duly consecrated — 1 elected,' says St. Ambrose, 
'by the judgment of God;' 2 only four out of the forty 
presbyters of Rome went with his foe. There was no com- 
petitor for the throne at the moment when Damasus was 
elected. Ammianus Marcellinus, looking at matters from the 
outside, sees in Damasus and Ursinus merely two rivals for 
a great position. But Damasus was seated on the throne 
when the opposition began ; he was the bishop, and the only 
bishop, on Cyprianic principles, ' since there cannot be a 
second after the first ; and whoever is made such after one 
who ought to be the only one, is not a second, but no bishop 
at all/ St. Jerome expressly says that it was after an interval, 
however short, that a rival bishop was started (' post non 
multum temporis spatium,' ' Chronicon '). 3 Bufinus says that 
before the troubles began, Damasus ' had received the episco- 
pate in the city by succession after Liberius.' He did not, 
therefore, mount an episcopal throne through streams of 
human blood. 4 

But Damasus having been elected and consecrated, not 
long — it may be immediately— afterwards, Ursinus, a deacon, 
stirred up a party against him, and succeeded in getting him- 
self elected and consecrated on a single day, 5 contrary to the 

1 Cf. Stilting's Life of St. Liberius in the Acta Sanctorum. 

* We could hardly have a better judge of the matter than St. Ambrose. 

* * A few days after ' (Dollinger). 

4 Primitive Saints, Ac. p. 140. It is strange that Mr. Puller should content 
himself with saying that 4 Ammianus Marcellinus divides the blame equally 
between the two competitors.' Just what a heathen would do. Mr. Barmby 
(Diet, of Chr. Diog. iv. 1069) thinks it a merit that Ammianus ' shows no bias 
on the one side or the other of the contest.' 

* Damasus waited the usual time. 




208 



IIIS RULE 



A~D. SCO 



canons, by the Bishop of Tivoli, an old and rough bishop, 
who usurped for the occasion the office of the Bishop of Ostia. 
His party seized on the basilica which Liberius had erected 
on the Esquiline in honour of our Lady, and in the endeavour 
to prevent the people, who sided with Damasus, flocking into 
it for their usual worship, a m&ee ensued. A savage Prefect 
of Corn, a considerable official, who took side with Damasus, 
mismanaged the matter, and a scene of bloodshed ensued. 
The whole matter (which included two frays) was, as Bufinus, 
a contemporary writer, says, 4 turned to the prejudice of the 
good and innocent bishop ' — i.e. Damasus. The judgment of 
the Prefect of Italy, a heathen, was against Ursinus as ' the 
author of the dissension ' — so at least we may gather from an 
expression of Valentinian's. And in the second fray, whilst 
the Prefect of Italy, who was then, it would seem, under the 
influence of Isaac the Jew, sided against Damasus, the vicar 
of the city corrected the judgment of his co-official, and Ursi- 
nus was banished the city. St. Damasus built a basilica at 
Nola in thanksgiving for his release from the trouble. 

III. No sooner had the reins of government been placed 
' by the judgment of God * in the hands of Damasus, than he 
entered upon a course of procedure which characterised his 
whole reign. Like others before him, but with still greater 
frequency, he conducted the affairs of the Church in concert 
with other bishops. The council was his instrument of rule. 
So much was this the case that presently 'The Westerns' 
and Damasus presented themselves to the East as one man. 
St. Basil sets it down to their own sins that things were so 
different in the East. He and the bishops that agreed with him 
saw in the West a unity of faith and action which they fairly 
envied. But this unity was not obtained without a struggle. 
Milan, the imperial residence, was the scene of discord at the 
beginning of Damasus* reign. Ursinus seems to have suc- 
ceeded in stirring up the embers of Arian misbelief outside 
Borne, and it found a champion in Milan in the bishop 
Auxentius. The bishops Ursacius and Valens, the old oppo- 
nents of St. Athanasius, together with Auxentius, were busy 
in the same mischievous work. St. Athanasius looked to 
Rome for the settlement of these difficulties. Already Borne 




--384 



THAT OF A CENTRAL 



200 



bad acted with vigour sufficient to induce St. Athanasnis to 
say, writing to the African bishops, ' We thank hrm 9 . 
' oar beloved Damasus 9 as he had just called him] * and those 
who met in the great city, that by casting out Ursaeras and 
Valens, and others who thought with them, they had pre- 
served the peace of the Catholic Church.' Bat St. A:Krarfi:is 
imagined that not enough had been dooe with record to 
Auxentius. Various synods had met and condemned th**r 
bat Borne, he thought, had not yet spoken plainly. Accord- 
ingly he expressed his surprise that Auxentius had not been 
' cast out of the Church. 9 1 But in reality, Damasus had d-zze 
more than St. Athanasius knew of. He had not ocly con- 
vened a council and reaffirmed the Nicene faith against Ursa- 
cios and Valens, but he had condemned Amentia in an 
encyclical, in spite of the support given to him by the emperor. 
And he had written in the name of the synod to the Ulrrian 
bishops, and through them to the East, a letter which was to 
set men's minds at rest as to the value of the Council of 
Ariminum, in which so many bishops had failed. 

This letter is of great importance as evidence of the posi- 
tion held by the Holy See in the mind of the Church zktj^ 
rally. It appears from St. Athanasius that nothing Ie=e than 
a Roman synod could authoritatively allay the disquiet abroad. 
Bat the value of a Boman synod could obviously only be 
rated thus by reason of its being an e x pr ess i on of the mrr*! 
of the Bishop of Rome ; for the rest of the bishop? had no 
more influence than an ordinary Eastern prelate. Itemascs 
then tells the Ulyrian bishops, and through them the vfccie 
East, that they must not allow their minds to be swayed by 
the great number of the bishops who went aetray at Aricd- 
num. In this matter numbers do not count, ' for/ he sari, 
4 it is evident that neither the Boman bishop * — is. LiY^ri^s— 
1 whose judgment was the one to be looked far before ai^ dct 
Vincentius, nor others, gave any consent to s&eh decrees.' 
Now it cannot be supposed that Vincentius and a few others 

1 *np4(0rrv«, wm p*Xfi www •* —fr y tfj mmL imfiifikwrm to to)^«. Ia 
what follows I have, for the most part, followed MtR&k vzs.** ^jcsmxyk en 
St Damsons is to be found in Migne's edition of the* Pope'* *aen. %*A mmm 
to me a masterpiece of aeonrate reasoning 




210 



SOURCE OF JURISDICTION. 



a.d. 300 



could outweigh the immense number of lapsed bishops in the 
disastrous Council of Ariminum. Nor could Vincentius, and 
a few others, plus the Roman bishop, counterbalance such 
numbers, unless there were something special in the position 
of the latter bishop. Damasus, however, and his synod 
could assume in those to whom he wrote a recognition of the 
singular position of the Roman bishop, whose refusal to sign 
the Ariminian confession nullified the effect of the vast de- 
fection on the part of the bishops. The synodal letter also 
speaks of the bulwark against heresy raised by the Nicene 
Creed. The Western bishops were, be it remembered, writing 
to the East, and they thus described the Nicene Council: 
' Our ancestors, three hundred and eighteen bishops, directed 
from the city of the most holy Bishop of the city of Rome, a 
council having been arranged at Nicsea, erected this bulwark 
against the devil's weapons.' 

Later on 1 the IUyrians assented to the Roman programme, 
condemned certain heretics, and announced their adherence 
to the ' Consubstantial Trinity.' 

But equally important from another point of view is the 
letter of the emperor accompanying his confirmation of the 
decrees of the Illyrian bishops. He warns bishops against 
pleading in the East the faith of their emperor, for that, he 
says, would be disobedience to the scriptural command, 
* Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto 
God the things that are God's.' There was, therefore, no 
confusion in theory at this time between the temporal and 
spiritual order— a fact to be remembered when we come to 
the Rescript of Gratian. The Western emperor only gave 
civil privilege to that which the spiritual authorities them- 
selves decided. 

So far, then, the Bishop of Borne comes before us as the 
centre of Christendom at a time when the imperial residence 
was at Milan, and when some of the greatest bishops that the 
Church ever possessed were engaged in the conflict for the 

1 The chronology here is exceedingly difficult. Mansi and Merenda bring 
in Valentiniah's action here. Hefele gives reasons for supposing it to be some- 
what later, in the same year as his death (cf. Hefele, ii. 289 ; Merenda, Oesta 
Daman, sub anno 370). 




—384 



HIS GUARDIANSHIP. 



211 



orthodox faith. This central position of the Bishop of Book 
will appear still more clearly as we proceed. Milan, Treves, 
Sirmiom, Thessalonica, Constantinople, possess in their mm 
the imperial court ; bat the headship of the Church remains 
at Borne. There, hemmed in by an idolatrous prefect, a 
mixed senate (of which pagans formed the larger portion , a 
disunited clergy, cosmopolitan heresy represented by the 
sectaries of Africa, Syria, the depths of Spain, organised 
calumny incited by the Jew Isaac, and abore all, at one time, 
an anti-Pope at the Esquiline, Damasus proceeded with his 
work of ruling the Church from Great Britain to Africa, and 
from Gaul to Constantinople. 1 No mere headship, such as 
the Duke of Norfolk possesses amongst the English nobility, 
will explain the attitude of the Church in general towards the 
Bishop of Borne 1 in this fourth century. 

IV. It was the special glory of Damasus that it fell to his 
lot to guard the Church's faith on two essential points, and 
to condemn the leaders of the two heresies that took the 
place of Arianism, during his long and fruitful reign. On both 
these questions the great St. Basil proved unequal to the task 
of discerning the germs of evil, and dealing with them with 
decision. His fight — and no words can describe the grandeur 
of his stand — was at the first against Arianism ; and he ended 
with writing one of the most magnificent treatises that the 
Church possesses on the Divine glory of the Third Person. 
But when Apollinarius started his heretical t+m+hrng the 
Easterns could not believe that one who had deserved so well 
of the Church had fallen into a new heresy, and Basfl leaet of 
all. Basil, indeed, thought Apollinarius 'ready to say any* 
thing,' but would not openly condemn his doctrine and break 
with him. Whilst wellnigh the whole East was resounding 
with his heterodox position, St. Basil would not allow him- 
self to think of him as the victim accused of a funda- 
mental heresy ; and he managed to furnish his enemies wnh 
weapons of which it needed all the dexterity of an Athanaa^s 
to turn the point. There can be no question that Basfl was 
absolutely orthodox on the point himself ; but he did not see 
1 Damass, par VAbbe Callen (Paris, 1871). 

* This is the illustration selected bj Mr. Poller, Primitive 55. p. 239. 




212 



OF THE FAITH. 



a.d. 800 



the danger that threatened the Church from Apollinarius. 
Yet this heretic had begun to organise ; he was gaining a 
following among the bishops, and the East was in danger 
of being overrun with Apollinarianism as before with 
nanism. But, as the Eastern historian notes, ' Damasus, 
Bishop of Rome, and Peter of Alexandria, having discovered 
the beginning of the new heresy, condemned it in a council 
held at Borne as contrary to the Catholic Faith.' 1 

The same was the case with the Macedonian heresy which 
in part occasioned the Council of Constantinople. It was for 
a while dealt with too tenderly by the Greeks. St. Basil even 
incurred blame for his charitable tolerance of it. No blame, 
indeed, properly attaches to an individual saint for not per- 
ceiving the germs of heresy as they first appear ; but at this 
critical moment in the Church's life, when Arianism was being 
put to death, it is to be noticed that, as a matter of fact, the 
Holy See was the source of strength to the episcopate in 
meeting the new forms of heresy that arose upon its grave. 
That see might be expected to be occasionally deceived by 
persons who dissimulated to gain its support, as in the case of 
Yitalis ; but in regard to the doctrine at issue it was as a 
matter of fact the unerring judge. 2 

And the strength of its occupant lay as well in the divine 
assistance which was pledged to his office as in his own 
perpetual consciousness of his relationship to the Prince of 
the Apostles. Thus he says of his promotion : 

Hinc mihi provecto Christus oui gumma potestas 
Sedis Apostolic® voluit oonoedere honorem." 

To the Easterns he wrote : ' It redounds principally to your 
own honour, most honoured sons, that your love pays the reve- 
rence which is due to the Apostolic See.' 4 At the same time 
he iB careful to remind them of his own unworthiness to hold 
the position. 

Sozomen, vi. 25. 

* When St. Basil speaks of the ignorance of the West concerning affairs in 
the East, on which Mr. Puller lays some stress, he is alluding to oases in which 
the orthodoxy of particular persons was temporarily in question, not of matters 
of faith. He exaggerates somewhat into the bargain. 

a Dama$i Carm, xxxv. * Ep. iii. 



Digitized by 



—384 



THE EAST LOOKED TO ROME 



213 



We have to this day the distich which St. Damasus wrote 
in the baptistery, where he seems to have placed the chair of 
the Apostle. It runs thus : 

• One chair of Peter, one only true bath. 1 1 

He sat, then, according to his own belief, in the chair of Peter. 
And nothing, as we shall see, but a recognition of this on the 
part of Eastern and Western Christendom can explain the 
action of the episcopate during his troubled reign. 

V. The Church in the East had been plunged into the 
utmost distress. St. Basil's descriptions are heartrending, 
and he assured St. Athanasius that, in his belief, there was 
no way of help but for the Western episcopate to assist. 

Now, what did St. Basil mean by the Western bishops ? 
Not certainly individual bishops acting on their own account. 
Neither could they all act together, except by representation. 
But the West throughout these times was ordinarily repre- 
sented by the Roman synod. And in what could the Roman 
synod surpass the rest of the Church, except in the position of 
its president, the Bishop of Rome ? St. Basil in his sixty-sixth 
letter is thought to allude to the action taken recently by Rome 
in regard to Auxentius of Milan. He seems to long for some- 
thing of the same kind, so that the scholiast heads this letter 
of St. Basil's to that effect. St. Basil tells St. Athanasius that 
his first idea was to induce the West to send an imposing 
array of legates, commissioned by a vast synod, which would 
impress these perverse Easterns by its numbers. He thought 
that there was nothing like appearance of numbers to counter- 
act the impression produced by the immense array of bishops 
who had failed in their duty at Ariminum. But this he saw to 
be impracticable ; consequently he fell back 2 on the regular 
mode of action in the Church. ' It appeared suitable to write 
to the Bishop of Rome and ask him to oversee [the verb of 
which bishop is the substantive form] matters here in the 
East and to give judgment, so that since it would be difficult 
for any of the Westerns to be sent by a common and synodical 

1 See an excellent summary of Rossi's argument concerning the chair of 
Peter in the Abbe Fouard's St. Peter and the First Years of Christianity, 
Appendix iv. 

* Compare Ep. lxx. with Ep. lxvi. 




214 



AS RULING ALL. 



A.D. 300 



decree, he [the Bishop of Rome] might act on his own 
authority in the matter, and choose out men equal to the task. 9 
The work which these legates would have to do was that of 
persuading the Eastern bishops to accept the ruling of the 
West concerning the disaster of Ariminum, which consisted 
essentially in the signature of the bishops having been obtained 
from them by force. 1 

Now St. Basil would never have recommended a plan 
against which these refractory bishops could lawfully ex- 
claim on technical grounds — against which, that is, they 
could urge that the Bishop of Rome had no right on his own 
authority to send legates to persuade them to accept the 
decisions arrived at in the Roman synod. The relation of 
Rome to the East must have been recognised by St. Basil as 
that of a superior authority, and he must have been well 
assured that his Eastern co-prelates held the same view. 

St. Basil, however, included in his requests a verdict in 
favour of St. Meletius and a condemnation of Marcellus, 
whose followers, as a matter of fact, were at that time siding 
with Paulinus. St. Basil's attitude towards Marcellus was, 
as we shall presently see, somewhat impetuous, and it is not 
certain that he was justified in his expressions referring to 
the past. The letters were sent to Rome by Dorotheus, a 
cleric from Antioch belonging to Meletius, and they were 
graciously received. St. Damasus sent a deacon of Milan 
named Sabinus, and afterwards the Bishop of Placentia, with 
the letters previously written to the Illyrians and the acts of 
the synod held two years before. In these letters St. Damasus 
had said that the Nicene synod defined 'that we ought to 
believe that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are of one Deity 
and one substance/ and then that those to whom they were 
addressed 'ought to approve this by reciprocal letters.' 
Valentinian's rescript obliged all, so far as imperial authority 
could go, to believe in accordance with the synod of Rome 
and the synods of Gaul, that 'there is one and the same 
substance of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit in Three Persons.* 

1 tyaVi} 8i ripuv hc6\ovBov l*t<rr€?X<u tq> 4 t t <r k6t q> "Pd/xris 4x ia k 4^ air 6 ai 
rk irravQa xal ^ovvaiyyu>fxt]v,1y ArctS^ barh koivov ko\ gvvoZikov H6ynaro% Airo- 
craX^vai rival ZvgkqXov rwv ticeiQtv, atnhv aitQtrrrjtrai wtpl rb -Kparyfxa (Ep. lxvi.). 




—384 



DAMASUS AND BASIL 



215 



The Ulyrian bishops anathematised all ' who do not hold and 
preach that the Trinity is consubstantiaL' 

I have laid stress on all this activity on the part of the 
Pope, because a recent writer has, as it seems to me, so 
thoroughly misrepresented the reign of Damasus. Speaking 
of this period, he says that St. Basil ' over and over again 
had written to Damasus to ask him, living as he was in com- 
parative peace and quiet [sic], to help the Eastern Churches 
which were suffering persecution; but nothing was done, 
although much might have been done.' 1 It will be seen, 
however, that we can hardly talk of peace and quiet in regard 
to the life of Damasus, nor is it true to say that ' nothing was 
done.' As a matter of fact, the letters from Borne led to 
action on St. Basil's part, for he writes to say in a letter, 
wrongly headed 'To the Westerns,' that they in the East 
agreed to 1 all that had been done by your Honour in accord- 
ance with the canons,' and that they had 'welcomed your 
Apostolic zeal concerning the true Faith.' 2 

VI. But it is true that affairs were not conducted at Borne 
exactly as Basil would have wished. St. Damasus and his 
synod did not agree with St. Basil as to the best method of 
putting an end to the differences at Antioch. It was considered 
at Borne that the uncanonical character of Meletius' election 
needed to be taken into account, and also Borne did not feel 
such perfect confidence in the orthodoxy of Meletius as St. 
Basil did. Borne required the matter to be accurately in- 
vestigated before coming to a decision. St. Basil proposed 
a legation from Borne to the East ; Borne preferred a legation 
from the East to herself. Considering all that we know of 
Eastern intrigue, and the terrible state of things in tbe 
Eastern Church, it was surely not unnatural that St. 
Damasus should wish for some more personal and searching 

1 Prim. SS. Ac. p. 171. St. Damasus, as a matter of fact, was in perpetual 
and pressing trouble in the West — not, it is true, from the emperor, but from 
other causes. 

* Ep. xc. In the same letter he calls Sabinus his ' fellow-deacon : ' the 
epithet expresses the brotherhood in which one was a bishop and the other a 
deacon. Attention to such phrases as these would have saved Mr. Puller from 
pressing the argument on p. 8. In the most Papal of Papal documents, viz. 
Hormisdas' Formulary, the Pope was addressed as 4 brother.' 




216 



NOT AGREED AS TO 



A-.D. 300 



investigation of the matter. St. Basil was not infallible. 
As a matter of fact, he had to be defended by St. Athanasins 
in more than one matter, and he eventually owned himself 
wrong in the matter of Marcellus. There would be, so 
Damasus naturally thought, a better chance of an accurate 
decision if the case were heard at Borne, with some thoroughly 
trustworthy legates to give information, than if Western 
legates were thrown into the sea of intrigue and false-dealing 
which, according to St. Basil himself, characterised the East. 
This, then, was the state of things as described by him in a 
letter to Eusebius of Samosata. At Rome they were in favour 
of a more thorough investigation of matters, on account of 
which St. Basil speaks of some there being greater sticklers 
for accuracy than others, 1 and says that these were not 
pleased with his letters. Accordingly the; were sent back by 
Evagrius, and St. Basil was asked (it was almost a demand, 
airair&v) to send another letter and to authoritatively arrange 
for an embassy through men of position and trustworthiness, 
in order to give Borne a colourable pretext * for undertaking 
that quasi- episcopal 3 visitation of the East for which St. Basil 
had so earnestly pleaded. One cannot help seeing that St. 
Damasus wished the embassy from the East to repair to 
Borne that the whole matter of the Antiochene dispute might 
be gone into with care. At present he seems to have been 
acting on the line adopted by Eusebius of Vercellee, his legate, 
when he left Antioch — that of withholding express and final 
sanction to either party. 

Evagrius left Basil to consult St. Meletius at Antioch, and 
received a letter from the former, saying that he did not 
suppose that anything would come of the whole correspond- 

1 Mr. Puller has paraphrased Basil's words, 4 the more accurate amongst 
those there/ as * Pope Damasus and the Roman clergy ' (Prim. SS. p. 285), 
and he translates hcpl&tui * preciseness.' It should be « precision/ He adds 
that St. Gregory Naz. speaks of the Pope and the Westerns as * the self-styled 
defenders of the canons.' St. Gregory does not use the word • Belf -styled.' He 
speaks of the Westerns as being, in the matter of Meletius, ' the defenders, as 
they allege (As ktyovew), of the canons,' i.e. their ground of action is that the 
canons were violated. He does not treat the matter with irony, but gives in 
fairness their plea. 

* §inrp6vvwov i^opfi-fir (Ep. cxxxviii.). 

* Trjs i-Kiatttyw iifxwy (to.). 




—384 



THE PLAN TO BE PURSUED. 



217 



ence, considering * the accuracy of the man and the [unsatis- 
factory] nature of writing.* 1 Judging from St. Basil's next 
letter (Ep. cxxix.) it would seem as if Eusebius of Samosata 
partly agreed with the advice of Evagrius, that St. Basil 
should at least write again to the Westerns. 2 Letters were 
accordingly addressed to the West, and in some of them 3 
they pleaded that the West cannot afford to do without the 
East any more than the head can say to the feet, I have 
no need of you. 4 After describing in detail the fearful 
calamities that were oppressing the East, they say that 
' doubtless many of us ought to run to your dignity and each 
be interpreters of his own matter [there] ' — an emphatic inci- 
dental recognition of the central position of Borne in the 
Christian Church. They could not go to all the Western 
bishops and lay their matters before them; nor could the 
West have any claim to such a reference, except by reason 
of the possession of some right of hearing appeals. This 
recourse, however (they say), is out of the question by reason 
of the circumstances of the times. 

The letters are exceedingly vague as to what was to be 
done, and they evade the request for an embassy to be sent 
to the West. True as it was that bishops could not, without 
great difficulty, leave their posts, still later on they did, for 

1 rris T€ rod iwUpbs lucpifctas *rroxa(6fittfos Kcd abrrjs rrjs Qfows r&v yptmiAdruv. 
I have adopted Merenda's interpretation, although at first sight the iicplfiua 
would seem to refer to Damasus and not Meletius. But I have no doubt that 
If erenda is right. 

* With regard to a note in Mr. Puller's hook (p. 173) concerning the head- 
ings of some letters that passed between St. Basil and the West, it must be 
remembered that there is no more depreciation of Papal authority in calling the 
Pope and the rest * the Westerns ' than there would be of the Queen's in a 
French statesman saying that he was going to write to ' the English/ including 
their sovereign. We do not expect modern styles of writing in the fourth 
century ; added to which there is some uncertainty about these titles. It seems 
quite certain that as they stand they are incorrect, and the scribe who trans- 
posed them may have simply headed them of his own accord. As for the title 
* Bishops of Italy and Gaul/ the very idea of St. Basil was to get numbers into 
the proposed demonstration, and the letter was sent straight to Borne. There 
are occasions when the congregations, which include the Pope, are addressed. 

» Ep. ocxliii. 

* They also say that they do not write * to inform your diligence/ htplfaia. 
Clearly, therefore, the word has a good sense as applied to the Westerns — im- 
plying diligent investigation— not (as Mr. Puller, p. 285) irony. 




218 PAULINUS RECOGNISED AT ANTIOCH, a.d. 300 

such a purpose as that of a council, and one cannot help 
perceiving in them a certain unwillingness to submit to the 
searching investigation of the matter which was desired at 
Rome, and which it was doubtless felt would be more impartial 
there than in the excited atmosphere of the East. 

St. Damaaus seems, however, to have held a synod, 1 and 
sent them encouraging letters, and Basil's hopes forthwith 
rose high ; but troubles soon came which materially altered 
the complexion of matters in his eyes. Yitalis seceded from 
Meletius at Antioch, and joined ApoUinarius, and, it would 
seem, was presently summoned to Rome. 8 Thither at any 
rate he went, and there he presented Damasus with a profes- 
sion of faith which St. Gregory describes as in actual words 
orthodox, and which, he says, accordingly deceived himself 
for a while. St. Damasus naturally thought him orthodox ; 
but was cautious enough to hand him over to Paulinus on his 
return to Antioch, to be dealt with as that bishop might 
think best. 

VII. This action of St. Damasus in regard to Yitalis was, to 
say the least, a sign of which side he took in the strife at 
Antioch. It was not, however, of necessity so emphatic a 
repudiation of Meletius as some have imagined. For Yitalis 
had quarrelled with Flavian, Meletius 1 agent at Antioch, and 
St. Meletius was himself in exile. It was, therefore, natural 
to send him to Paulinus. Still, it was an open acknowledg- 
ment of Paulinus as a proper person to deal with one under 
accusation for heresy, for St. Damasus seems almost im- 
mediately after Vitalis* departure from Rome to have come to 
the conclusion that he was not quite sure of his orthodoxy, 
and accordingly he sent to Paulinus a profession of faith 
which those were to sign who wished to be in communion with 
Rome. 3 Just at this time Peter also, St. Athanasius' saintly 
successor at Alexandria, was in Rome, and he, too, emphatically 
sided with Paulinus. St. Athanasius had himself written 

1 Cf. Merenda (Oesia Damasi, sub anno 374) for the evidence. 

2 Tillemont thinks he came spontaneously ; but St. Gregory speaks of his 
being required to make a profession of faith (Airamjflcfs), which implies some- 
thing less than spontaneity (cf. Oreg. Naz. Ep. ii. ad Cled.). 

* ' Qui . . . tibi, id est, nobis per te, voluerint sociari.' 




—384 



AND BASIL ANNOYED. 



219 



letters of communion to Paulinus after being at Antioch. 
Before going there he was inclined towards association with 
Meletius, but after being on the spot he sent letters to Paulinus. 
Tillemont has slipped into a mistake in supposing the reverse 
to have been the case, and Mr. Puller has followed him. But 
a careful comparison of St. Basil's letters shows that it was 
really after being at Antioch himself that St. Athanasius came 
to his final conclusion that communion should be maintained 
with Paulinus, although this by no means hindered him from 
intercourse with St. Meletius. 1 St. Athanasius had now won 
his crown in 378, and his mantle had descended on St. Peter, 
who now followed him in siding with Paulinus. This was in 
the year 375 a.d. 2 

VIII. St. Basil was naturally aggrieved at Rome's recogni- 
tion of Paulinus, and his tone suddenly changes. He wrote to 
Count Terence at Antioch to say that he 'hears' that the 
Paulinists ' are now carrying about letters from the Westerns, 
handing over the bishopric of Antioch to them, and ignoring 
the most wonderful bishop of the true Church of God, viz. 
Meletius.* 

What right, we may ask, had the Westerns to hand over 
the bishopric of the central city of the East to anyone ? By 
the Westerns St. Basil meant, according to the phraseology 
of the time, Borne, which he presently substitutes for 'the 
Westerns.' What right, then, had Borne to hand over any 
bishopric in the East whatsoever to anyone ? What greater 
act of jurisdiction could Rome perform than to decide upon 
the person who was to be in charge of Antioch ? Obviously 
Rome had the right, according to St. Basil. He never once 
disputes that right in itself. He had shortly before written 3 
to Eusebius of Samosata, asking his opinion as to whether 
he (Basil) could, under special circumstances of persecution, 
ordain a bishop outside his province, as he had been asked to 

1 Gf. the Benedictine note to Basil (Ep. ccxiv. ; Migne, Basil. Opp. t. iv.). 

2 Merenda seems quite conclusively to have proved this: because (1) time 
must be left for St. Basil's phase of pleasure with Borne before these letters to 
Paulinus ; and (2) Vitalis was not yet bishop (he was made bishop in 37G) ; and 
(3) Count Terence, to whom St. Basil at once wrote, as being in Antioch, was 
there only from 373 to 375. 

* Ep. cxxxviiL 2. 




220 



BASIL COMPLAINS, 



a.d. 300 



do, it being against the canons. Bat he never once questions 
this right in the case of Rome. Paulinas had been ordained 
by a Western bishop, and he was now being established in his 
position by the Bishop of Borne. St. Basil distinctly refuses 
to take the ground that the Pope had no jurisdiction over 
Antioch. In his indignant letter about Meletius being passed 
over, when expressing the extent to which he was prepared to 
go in the way of disagreement with Rome, he never disputes 
Rome's right in itself. On the contrary, he congratulates 1 
the Paulinists as having received the letters of communion 
from Rome. He numbers them amongst the household of the 
faith. 9 But he is not prepared on that account ' to ignore 
Meletius, or to forget, for his part (hrikaOiaOcu), the Church 
under him.' 3 For this also, he says, ' is the true Church of God.' 
He then defines his position still more definitely, and says 
that 1 in the case of one who is not walking according to the 
rule [or word] of faith, he would not receive him, not even if 
he came from Heaven itself, much less if he was one of the 
sons of men with a letter of commendation.* 4 

There is nothing in this to contravene the decrees of the 
Vatican Council itself, as has been recently supposed.* Those 
decrees do not force anyone to receive a person who is de- 
monstrably contravening the rule of faith, whatever letters 
he may produce. It may be a matter of piety so to do, a 
question of humility whether we should take our own judg- 
ment as our rule, a counsel and a supernatural virtue, but 
it is not a matter of necessity under pain of sin, for such a 
decision as that of St. Damasns does not fall under the shelter 

1 ovyicalpopty rots Konura/ifrois avb 'PApris. * obctlovs Trjs wUrrtmt. 

9 M*k4rtO¥ byytrijo-cu $ rrjs for* airrbr 'EjrfrAijo-fas ArtAalcVfat. 

4 St. BaBil is probably alluding not merely to Paulinas but to Vitalis, 
who seems to have kept letters from Damasus to which he was not really 
entitled, as he was certainly not walking according to the rule of faith. I have 
transposed the limbs of the above sentence from St. Basil in order to show 
what seems to me to be the certain meaning. Mr. Puller has slipped in the 
word * letter/ and translated croixi ' agree with ' — a meaning which it never 
bears in Greek. The reference is obviously to Gal. v. 25, vi. 16, where the word ia 
used of persons, not of things. St. Gregory Naz. has the same idea in 
reference to some Easterns' jealousy of Rome. He says that if angels were to 
come and occupy the East with their vain rivalries, he would protest (Carm. de 
Vita, 1006). » Prim. SS. pp. 238-240. 




—384 



BUT ADMITS 



221 



of Papal infallibity. It was not an ex cathedrd pronunciation, 
not something concerning the faith itself, not a decision 
obligatory on the whole Church, It was not even, so far as 
we know, an injunction on anyone. He passed no direct 
sentence on Meletius ; he certainly did not excommunicate him : 
St. Basil nowhere implies that. I do not say that what St. 
Basil said was commendable or exemplary. His fault was 
that which St. Gregory notices, that of too great affection 
towards Meletius. What he would have done had Rome 
refused her communion to Meletius, we are unable to say for 
certain, but we can make a fair conjecture from what followed. 

In the beginning of the following year Dorotheus went to 
Borne again with letters from St. Basil and the Easterns, 
and, although a cleric under Meletius, was received as a 
matter of course. 1 It was in reference to this journey and the 
proposal that St. Basil's brother, St. Gregory of Nyssa, 
should accompany Dorotheus to Rome, that St. Basil wrote 
one of his most petulant letters. It was a private letter to 
Eusebius of Samosata. He speaks 'of disdainful tempers' 
and 'Western superciliousness.' If the allusion is to St. 
Damasus, he was certainly indulging his imagination— he 
did not know him personally — and there is nothing in 
Damasus' letters to justify such an imputation, nor was it 
the impression which those who knew him appear to have 
gained. It is quite possible 2 that he does not in any way 
allude to Damasus, for he speaks of being ( minded ' to write to 
their ' head ' informally (avev rov koipov <rx 7 1f JLaT09 )f nothing 
about ecclesiastical matters except to hint that they (i.e. the 
Westerns, not ' their head,') « neither know the truth of what 
is going on amongst us, nor go the right way to learn it.' 3 St. 
Basil knew that there were some who differed from him, like 
St. Peter of Alexandria and probably St. Ambrose, who had now 
been consecrated at Milan, and he seems to have been ' minded ' 

1 Similarly, later on, Acacias of Beroea seems to have been sent from 
Meletius to Borne, and to have been at a synod with Damasus. This must have 
been before 381, when he helped to consecrate Flavian, and after 378, when he 
was made bishop. The date is significant. 

* Vincenzi (De Heb. et Christ Sacr. Monarchid) thinks it certain that he 
did not. Cf. De Liberio et Dantaso, second edit. 

1 Ep. ccxxxix. 




222 



PAPAL SUPREMACY. 



a.d. 300 



to write straight to Damasus and tell him that ' these and such 
as these were misinformed.' He was * minded/ but did not do 
it. In that case 1 Western superciliousness ' did not include 
Damasus. But considering how generally ' the Westerns ' was 
at that time an expression used for 1 Rome and the rest/ as 
1 Peter and the rest ' in Holy Scripture, I am inclined to think 
that he did simply , though unjustifiably, attribute St. Damasus 9 
action to superciliousness. Baronius, however, has a beautiful 
remark on this subject to the effect that although a saint may 
be caught humanly excited and disturbed in mind, he will not 
be detained in such a frame. Accordingly our saint did not 
actually write as he felt tempted to do, but in a very different 
tone. He asked the 'Westerns' to use their 'diligent 
accuracy/ 1 to ' denounce publicly to all the Churches in the 
East ' certain persons whom he names, ' in order that either 
correcting their ways they may be in sincere harmony with 
us, or, persisting in their perversity, they may keep their 
harm to themselves, being no longer able to infect those near 
them through unguarded communion with them.' If this 
was not calling upon Borne to exercise jurisdiction in the East, 
it would be difficult to imagine what evidence could be 
produced that would satisfy those who see in the history of 
these times no indication of lordship over the universal 
Church. And, be it remembered, the lordship in this case did 
not simply come from Rome, but was attributed to her. She 
did not claim it here, but was asked to use it. 

IX. So that St. Basil had come to a better mind concern- 
ing ' Western superciliousness/ and the same is true of his 
persistent accusation of carelessness in the matter of Marcellus. 
The truth about Marcellus of Ancyra is one of the most 
difficult points in the history of this century, and I shall 
not pretend to have solved it. 2 What is of importance to 
note here is that, whether rightly or wrongly, St. Basil 
modified his judgment as to the treatment of Marcellus, whose 
case he considered had been so inadequately dealt with at 

1 So I have ventured to translate &#rp(jScia, which occurs again here, and is 
unquestionably not ironical but laudatory (cf. p. 217, note 4). 

* For a most careful summary of the case for and against Marcellus, see 
Hefele's Councils, vol. ii. p. 29 seq., Eng. tr. 




—384 



INFALLIBILITY HAS LIMITS. 



223 



Borne. At this time and for some while he had considered 
that Marcellus had rejected i all the dogmas of our hope ; ' 
but in the letter to Eusebius, in which he speaks of Western 
superciliousness, he refers to what had been previously done in 
the case of Marcellus. 1 One only hopes he does not allude, 
as Merenda thinks, to the action of the prelates of Sardica, 
whose judgment in the matter ought to have been sufficient 
for that period, but, anyhow, he ultimately admitted that 
there was another side to the matter. And as for his sup- 
posing that the Westerns, by whom he probably meant the 
Pope (though this is not certain, 3 seeing that on this occasion 
he mentions him separately), could be guilty of 'supporting 
heresy,' this in no wise shows, as Mr. Puller thinks, 4 that 
' St. Basil had no conception of the Bishop of Rome being the 
divinely appointed monarch of the Church.' A bishop of the 
present day, believing ex animo in the teaching of the Vatican 
decrees, might say the same as St. Basil did to the Holy 
Father, for there are many ways (direct and indirect) of 
giving support to heresy. In this case St. Basil considered 
that the Westerns had done it through ignorance of the real 
state of things, and not by any actual decision, but by not 
acting in a more decisive way. He was at liberty to consider it 
to be so, and yet might believe in the Pope as the divinely 
appointed monarch of the Church. We can say this because 
we have the Church's teaching, especially that of the Vatican 
decrees, to help us to understand that the Pope's divinely 
appointed position, though that of a monarch, is not that of a 
monarch who cannot err. There are matters and circum- 
stances in which the Pope cannot err, and in which absolute 
submission, under pain of mortal sin, is due from every child 
of the Church; but there are also circumstances in which, 
however we might shrink from acting upon the supposition, 
such submission is not a matter of necessity. It is necessary 
to say thus much because many of the arguments contained 
in Mr. Puller's book derive their force from this simple truth 

• * What they ' (i.e. the Westerns) * did before.' f Ep. oclxxi. 

* Mr. Poller takes it for granted that Damasus is meant. But he does not 
seem in his whole account to take the context into consideration. 

4 The sentence quoted from Bossuet is inaccuracy itself. 




224 



BASIL HOLDS THAT DAM ASUS 



a.d. 300 



being kept out of sight. They are directed against something 
that those whom he is pleased to call Ultramontanes do not 
believe. 1 In this instance Marcellus had at one time at least 
succeeded in inducing the Westerns in general to consider him 
orthodox, although St. Athanasius seems afterwards to have 
written against him without mentioning his name. At the 
time when he was received by St. Julius, St. Athanasius, and 
the rest of the Westerns, it is not certain that he was not 
orthodox at heart, as he certainly was in word ; but St. Basil 
probably knew Marcellus better than most men did, and he 
was at this time certain that at least in heart he was heterodox. 
The Pope, however, had only to do with his words and those 
of his followers, which was the point at issue at this present 
moment. Marcellus had not been condemned by any synod 
at the time that Basil wrote ; his case had not been formally 
brought before Borne. 

X. St. Basil, however, had calmed down before he joined in 
writing to the Westerns, and having appealed to their careful- 
ness in such matters, he says that if they will only make it clear 
with whom they hold communion (and, according to Mr. Puller, 
' they ' must mean especially Damasus), they will be listened 
to, both from their being further removed from the scene of 
trouble, and ' by reason of the grace of God conferred on you 
for the oversight of those in trouble.' It is difficult to see how 
this latter sentence can imply anything less than a belief that 
Borne was in possession of a charisma — that is to say, some- 
thing beyond a mere primacy of honour — in dealing with 
Eastern prelates. The West, of itself, could have no special 
' grace ' in this matter. 2 We can only explain the sentiment 
of St. Basil by that consciousness of a cliarisma attaching to 
the Apostolic See which made it the proper caretaker of the 
troubled East. He proceeds to say that if the multitude of 
them agree, as they did, so much the better. Their decrees 
would be beyond question even by these refractory Easterns. 

1 I know of nothing better calculated to help a diligent inquirer on this sub- 
ject than Mr. Wilfrid Ward's second volume of the Life of his father. I think 
it right to mention that some expressions in this book, almost identical with 
those used by that excellent writer, were in MS. before I had read that Life. 

* We could hardly apply such expressions to the Duke of Norfolk, who is 
the chosen type of Papal primacy in Prim. SS. dc. p. 229. 




—884 



CAN RESTORE AN EASTERN BISHOP. 



225 



He then mentions first the case of Eustathius of Sebaste. He 
had, St. Basil says, been deprived of his bishopric, 1 but had 
found a way of recovering it. He went to Rome, and was 
restored by Liberius ; and St. Basil says they neither know in 
the East what confession of faith he had put before the Pope, 
nor what conditions Liberius had laid down. All they know 
is, that ' he brought with him a letter ' from Rome, ' rein- 
stating him, and upon showing it he was restored to his 
position at the synod of Tyana.' No words can add to the 
force of this last sentence. If the restoration of a bishop by 
St. Damasus, on his own authority, is not an act of juris- 
diction, what is? And the bishops at Tyana took it for 
granted that a Papal letter directing his restitution was to be 
obeyed, and St. Basil has not a word to say against their 
attitude in the matter. At the same time St. Basil is quite 
right in demanding, as he went on to demand, that they should 
now know on what conditions Eustathius was restored, not 
that they might criticise the conditions, but that they might 
know if he had fulfilled them. The right settlement 2 of the 
matter must come from Rome, said St. Basil, and letters 
needed to be written thence 1 to the Churches.' He regrets 
that they could not hold council with the Westerns ; but in 
spite of that he accepts their authoritative action as adequate. 
Only (he says) Eustathius has changed, 3 and consequently his 
restoration does not appear to remain valid. 

St. Basil then deals somewhat tenderly with the case of 
Apollinarius, and passes on to Paulinus. He has an im- 
portant sentence about his ordination. He says, 1 If there is 
anything to blame concerning his ordination, they [i.e. the 
Westerns] would say.' Now, except on the theory of Papal 
jurisdiction over the East, there must have been everything to 
blame in Paulinus' ordination ; but St. Basil does not seem 

1 Viz. by the Council of Melitene. 2 tV Bi6p6a(riv. Ep. cclxiii. 3. 

* ii*ra&Kifi*ls. As a rule, the supremacy of the Holy See over the East was 
in those times exercised immediately only over the Patriarchal Sees, so to call 
them by anticipation. But this case of Eustathius of Sebaste is one of several 
instances in which the authority of Rome was exercised immediately over an 
Eastern bishop of lesser account, and it was on appeal from an Eastern synod, 
and the right of Borne thus to act was admitted both by the synod and by St. 



Basil. 



Q 




226 



ST. DAMASUS* ATTITUDE 



a.d. 800 



to consider that he has any right to object to it. He con- 
siders that lies with the Westerns, i.e. with St. Damasus. 
'What grieves us/ says Basil, 'is his [Paulinas'] sympathy 
with the dogmas of Marcellus, and admitting his followers in- 
discriminately to his communion.' 1 1 We ask for your careful 
oversight (iirifUXei^av) of these things, which will be effectual 
if you will vouchsafe to write to all the Churches in the East, 
to the effect that those who deprave .... are, if they 
amend, in communion (slvat, koivmvow), but if they determine 
to persist in their novelties, you withdraw from them.' It would 
be difficult to put into plainer language the teaching that if 
people wish to be in communion with the Church, they must 
be in communion with Eome. 

XI. St. Damasus at once, on receiving these letters from 
Basil, held a synod (at which Peter of Alexandria was present) 
and Apollinarius was condemned. Merenda gives most cogent 
reasons for believing that this was not later than a.d. 877. St. 
Basil's tone towards Apollinarius at once changed. Before 
this synod he had said 2 that Apollinarius was 'not exactly an 
enemy ' — now in his letter to Bishop Eulogius and two other 
Egyptian bishops he speaks of him as outside the Church. 
The Roman synod had made the difference. 

About this time St. Basil seems to have written to St. 
Peter of Alexandria to express his sorrow that the latter had 
spoken of Meletius and Eusebius of Samosata, in presence of 
Damasus, as though they were tinged with Arianism. Peter 
was probably alluding to the document which the two had 
signed, addressed to the Emperor Jovian, which led St. Jerome 
to speak of St. Meletius as having repudiated the Homoousiofi, 
and which probably influenced St. Athanasius in his cautious 
attitude towards St. Meletius. St. Damasus appears to have 
adopted the same cautious attitude, admitting Dorotheus, 
Meletius' agent, to full communion and calling him ' brother/ 
but not entering into close intercourse with Meletius. It must 
be remembered, as has been already remarked, that there was 
often a separation between a presbyter and his bishop, be- 

1 It mil be noticed that Mr. Puller's version of this matter does not at aU 
square with what St. Basil here says. 
* Ep. cciy. 




—384 



TOWARD ST. MELEHUS 



227 



tween a bishop and his province, and again between a province 
and Borne, very far short of depriving them of the sacraments, 
but still reckoned as a serious calamity in those times. The 
separation would consist sometimes in the withdrawal of letters 
of communion, or of mutual access, or of conciliar intercourse, 
or other marks of that close association between bishops which 
was the normal state of things. 1 So Sozomen, speaking of 
the separation between East and West on the occasion of 
Flavian's ordination, says the Westerns sent ' the accustomed 
letters ' to Paulinos, but ' to Flavian none.' It did not 
amount to constituting either side schismatics, although 
strong terms would be often used. But there was a chasm 
between putting a bishop outside the Church and interrupting 
the closer intercourse which was the ordinary result of being 
in communion with one another. 

XII. Still, anyone in the East who wished to be completely 
on the right side would be anxious to know who was in close 
ecclesiastical intercourse with ' the Westerns,' by which was 
meant the Pope and the bishops in communion with him, 
and no one unless already in the meshes of heresy would wish 
to be thought out of communion with the West in the sense 
of lacking recognition by them as the lawful bishop of a see. 
Accordingly, we know from St. Jerome that at Antioch 
Paulinus, Vitalis, and Meletius all claimed to possess the seal 
of Home's recognition. 3 Paulinus could say that he was on 
terms of closest intercourse, since, amongst other things, Borne 
had handed over Vitalis to be dealt with by him. Vitalis, 
having broken away from the faith, on returning to Antioch, 
still traded on the letters he had received from Damasus, when 
he had deceived the Pope by a profession of faith which was 
orthodox in terms, but which he understood in an heretical 
sense. Meletius was able to say that Borne, although not in closest 
intercourse with him, had never repudiated bis communion. 

There is no fair reason for distrusting St. Jerome's state- 
ment here. This assertion on the part of each of the three, 
repeated by their adherents (which shows the general value 
set on communion with Borne), caused him perplexity, and be 
wrote to Damasus to ask him with which of the three be was 

1 Cf. Merenda, sub anno 376, and De Smedt, DU$. 2, p. 70. * Ep. xri. 



q 2 




228 ST. JEROME ON THE ' CHAIR OF PETER/ a.d. 300 



to communicate. He conceived that he was uttering the 
usual sentiments of a Catholic Christian, as indeed he was, 
when he said (in a previous letter) of the 'chair of Peter,' 

* Upon that rock I know that the Church is built.' In this 
second letter he says, 'I meanwhile exclaim if anyone be 
joined to the chair of Peter, he is mine. Meletius, Vitalis, and 
Paulinus say that they adhere to you ; if only one of them 
asserted this, I could believe him.' It is natural to suppose 
from this that all three claimed in express terms to be in 
communion ' with the chair of Peter.' The expression could 
not be an idiosyncrasy of St. Jerome's. He knew well the 
teaching of Home ; he had been eleven years in the Christian 
Church. All parties were eager to secure his adherence, as he 
himself says ; his praise was already in all the Churches ; he 
was more than the fit age to be a bishop. 1 No one seems to 
have told him that he should not speak of Damasus as occupy- 
ing the chair of Peter ; all they did was to claim each one to 
be in communion with that chair. That Damasus himself had 
all along claimed to sit in the chair of Peter, in more than one 
sense, is certain. The inscription which he wrote about the 
material chair of the Apostle, preserved at Borne, showed his 
teaching concerning the chair of Peter in the metaphorical 
sense. 2 

St. Jerome, it may be noticed, in his first letter speaks of 
the use of the term Hypostasis, by some in the singular, by 
others in the plural, in regard to the Holy Trinity — a contro- 
versy which had been laid to rest at the Council of Alex- 
andria, either form of speech being allowed. But now, when 
Damasus had shown his special favour to Paulinus, the 
Eustathians, as the party of Paulinus was called, began to 

1 St. Jerome, it has been urged, a little before had spoken of himself as 

* pene puer.' But it must be remembered that St. Jerome spoke of a person 
as ' adolescens ' up to forty, and he was older than St. Athanasius was when, 
in the words of Canon Bright, * he made himself felt as a power in the First 
General Council,' and older than the same saint when he was made Archbishop 
of Alexandria. 

* Mr. Puller, speaking of the Popes pleading their succession from St. Peter 
as a religious basis for their jurisdiction, says : 1 Whether Damasus did so plead 
it I cannot say ' (p. 159). He may rest assured that Damasus was 4 guilty ' of 
pleading his succession to Peter throughout his reign. 




—384 



THE COMPACT OF ANTIOCH, a.d. 378. 



229 



draw the Meletians, in the absence of Meletius, towards them- 
selves. Consequently St. Basil thought it right to revive the 
controversy, and to insist upon the importance of the differ- 
ence between the two expressions. St. Gregory of Nazianzus 
on the other hand (at any rate later on) deprecated making 
this different way of speaking of the Godhead a ' dividing ' 
question, since both parties meant the same. 

It is clear from what St. Jerome says about some com- 
bining him as a heretic * with the Westerns and the Egyp- 
tians ' — i.e. with St. Damasus and St. Peter— that he was 
allowed by the former to use the Western expression of one 
Hypostasis in the Triune God (meaning substance) and that 
St. Damasus* answer led him to communicate with Paulinus, 
by whom he was shortly afterwards ordained priest. 

XIII. And now a new chapter in the affairs of Antioch 
begins. The law of Gratian in favour of tolerance for almost 
all to practise their own religion had enabled Meletius to 
return to his flock at Antioch. He seems at once to have set 
to work to bring about some kind of peace between Paulinus 
and himself. All, however, that they could effect was to 
agree that when either of them died the survivor should suc- 
ceed to the one throne. The churches remained as they 
were, the great majority in the hands of Arians, one in the 
possession of Paulinus, and one in the suburbs in the hands 
of Meletius. The flocks of the two bishops held communion 
with one another. Thus much seems to follow from the 
scene before Sapor later on. In that interview the question 
was, not as to whether the church owned by either Paulinus 
or Meletius should pass into the hands of the other, but who 
should have the use of the churches of the Arians, who by 
the law of Theodosius were now to be ejected. But we may 
trust Theodoret's account 1 so far, that the flocks were by 
that time already in the enjoyment of intercommunion. If it 
is to be trusted any further, it would establish that Paulinus 
refused to go further than the compact, which was certainly 

1 Theodoret's narrative is coloured by his partisanship for Flavian. It is not 
altogether reliable, certainly not as to Paulinus rejecting any overtures, which 
is contrary to the evidence of St. Gregory. But his witness on the other points 
is disinterested. 



Digitized by 



230 



ST. MELETIUS PROMULGATES 



A.D. 800 



not made at that interview. Meletius, according to Theo- 
doret, proposed joint action daring their lifetime, bat this 
Paalinus thoaght unadvisable or impossible. The reasonable 
sapposition, then, is that the compact, which we know to 
have been made, was entered upon on St. Meletius* return 
from exile, and hence came the peace, to which St. Gregory 
alludes as having been established for at least some little 
while, and the disturbance of which the Council of Aquileia so 
strongly denounced, upon the ordination of Flavian. 1 

Meletius at once set about the assembly of a council of 
his friends, one main object of which seems to have been to 
proclaim their adherence to the orthodox faith, that the 
Church might be seen to be thoroughly one in the doctrines 
which had been recently depraved, and on which they were 
themselves supposed by some to be in a state of hesitation. 
This great council (a.d. 879), at which the letters of Damasus 
were read— those from the first Roman synod (sent first to 
Illyrium and then to the Easterns) and those sent through 
Dorotheus from his second and third synods — accepted what 
was afterwards called in the Fifth Canon of Constantinople 
the 'Tome of the Westerns '—the dogmatic letter drawn up 
by the Roman synod under the presidency of Damasus, which 
proclaimed the ' one Deity and one substance * of the Holy 
Trinity. 

Thus the entire West, the whole of Egypt, and the whole 
Eastern Church had embraced the decision of Damasus and 
the Roman Church concerning the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. 

Meletius sent this important document to Rome, signed 
first by himself and next by Eusebius of Samosata, and it 
was duly registered in the archives. The entry in the i Syno- 
dicus Libellus * seems an accurate summary of this event- 
ful inauguration of the long-desired peace. ' Meletius, in his 
throne of Antioch, convened a divine and sacred synod, 
which confirmed the divine symbol, and anathematised Mar- 
cellus, Photinus, and Apollinarius, and he sent the exposition 
(of faith) to Damasus and the Western bishops.' 2 

' Cf. p. 253. 

* Syn. cap. lxxiv. Tillemont labours hard to prove that the compact be- 
tween Meletius and Paulinas had not been made at this time. Blondel, the 




—884 



THE 'TOME OF THE WESTERNS/ 



231 



The theory that this all-important document was not sent 
formally and officially to Rome, but found its way thither 
accidentally and privately, is so contrary to the ways of that 
time, so utterly unreasonable in itself, that I should not 
mention it here, were it not that the author of ' The Primitive 
Saints and the See of Rome * has so emphatically adopted it. 1 
The synod of Constantinople in 882, which is often con- 
founded with that of 881, in its letter to Damasus, assumes 
that he had received official notice of the adoption at Antioch 
of this 1 Tome of the Westerns.' The formal acceptance of 
Meletius' subscription as 4 Bishop of Antioch' would not 
prove, as Mr. Puller thinks, that Rome accepted him as the 
only bishop. The letter of the Council of Aquileia proves 
the contrary. 2 Neither, if we are to trust Theodoret's ac- 
count of the interview with Sapor at Antioch, did Meletius 
himself look upon himself as the only Bishop of Antioch, 
although he did consider that his flock had been entrusted to 
him by Almighty God. It was not an unknown thing for two 
bishops to rule in one city under anomalous circumstances 
by special arrangement. The Pope, St. Melchiades, gave 
permission to some of the Donatist bishops to retain their 
sees when they renounced their schism, so that there were 
temporarily, and by Papal dispensation, two bishops in one 

Protestant, and Baronius and Valesius agree that it was. Tillemont's argu- 
ments have been met and, as it seems to me, fully answered by Merenda, who 
points out (in answer to Tillemont's assertion, that a compact so public could 
not have been broken by the Council of Constantinople) that the very point of 
St. Gregory's complaint was that a public compact had been broken, and in 
this he was followed by the older and more reverend bishops. For the dis- 
graceful conduct of the bishops at that synod, which led to St. Gregory's resig- 
nation of the see, see pp. 252-3. The compact was disregarded at the council 
rather than by the council. The saints were opposed to its breach. Mr. Puller's 
argument about St. Meletius hinges so much on Tillemont's indefensible line 
on this point, and on a misunderstanding of the interview with Sapor (cf . Prim. 
SS. pp. 245-7) that it may be well to remind some readers that, in spite of Mr. 
Puller's attempt to rehabilitate Tillemont whole and entire, and his entitling 
him a 4 Roman Catholic divine ' more than once, the authority of Tillemont as 
a divine counts for nothing with us, and that his history has been submitted 
to * corrections ' on, so to speak, a thousand points. He was, as Merenda (who 
frequently exposes his mistakes) called him, 'doctissimus et piissimus,' but 
neither his learning nor his piety have saved him from serious errors. 
1 P. 242. * * Mansi, i iii. p. 631. 




232 



DR. DOLLINGER'S SUMMARY. a.d. 800-884 



city. 1 Dr. Dollinger's summary of the matter is perfectly 
accurate, viz. : 1 The two Catholic parties at Antioch had mutu- 
ally agreed, in 878, that the survivor of the two rival prelates 
should be acknowledged by all as sole bishop.' 2 

Thus far, then, the Church in the East could breathe 
again. The peace, of which St. Gregory spoke with real 
eloquence, was established. It only remained for those in 
Antioch to wait until one of the two bishops was taken to his 
reward for the perfect order of the Church to be restored. It 
would seem that in the same year the Church asked of the 
new emperor a civil confirmation of this peaceable, if ab- 
normal, solution of the Antiochene trouble. 3 

1 Until a fresh see was found. 
7 Lchrbuch (1843), vol. i. p. 91. 

9 Man si, t, iii. p. 623. 4 Partium pactum poposcimus ut . . . permanerent ' 

(cf. infra, p. 265, and the note on p. 267). 




CHAPTEB XV. 



THE HOMAGE OF KINGS J OR GRATIAN's RESCRIPT. 

I. During the reign of St. Damasus the relation of the civil 
power to the Church entered upon a new phase. During the 
first three centuries the Church had developed her internal 
relations in doctrine and discipline wholly irrespective of the 
State; but so soon as Constantino adopted the Christian 
religion as professedly his own the Church had to adjust her 
administrative forms to the exigencies of her new position. 
She had, from time to time, to decide upon what was essen- 
tially under her own direction, and her own alone, and what 
could fall under the joint action of Church and State. But 
the complete adjustment of her relations to the civil power 
could only be accomplished when the occupant of the imperial 
throne was (what Constantino was not) a faithful subject of 
the Church. Until then, she acted on the principle enunciated 
by St. Gregory the Great, of obtaining what was practicable 
and accepting the unavoidable with the best grace possible. 
But from the first she laid down the principle that the typical 
relation of the two powers was not that of separation, leaving 
each to its own sphere of action, but of co-operation, in which 
the civil power should aid the spiritual in certain external 
matters, whilst the spiritual announces the laws which must 
govern every man's exercise of whatever power he has received 
from God. The Church and the State have each of them 
received their powers from the One God ; those powers, there- 
fore, cannot properly come into conflict. But not only so ; 
they must in the nature of things be mejint to act in harmony 
and co-operate towards the one end of man, his final beati- 




234 CHURCH AND STATE UNDER GRATIAN. a.d. 800 



tude. Moreover, when their spheres seem to conflict, the 
Church is, necessarily, the judge of the limits which each is 
hound to observe. She has the custody of the laws which 
govern man in the attainment of his supernatural beatitude, 
and consequently wherever she may decide that a mode of 
action is necessary for that end, any exercise of civil authority 
that contravenes or hinders such action is not the use of a 
power given by God, but a transgression of the limits within 
which the civil order was meant to act. The classical meta- 
phor which expresses the relation between the civil power and 
the Church is that of the body and the soul. The Church's 
action stands in relation to the civil order as the soul to the 
body. It was at this very time that this metaphor, which is 
commonly used in the theology of the Church to express this 
relationship, was first used by St. Gregory of Nazianzus, 
and it was at this time that the actual relationship between 
Church and State approached more nearly than at any pre- 
vious period to its typical expression. 

II. Constantine used the power which the gratitude of 
Christians awarded him, on the whole, with moderation, 1 
but on coming under the influence of Eusebius he began to 
encroach on the prerogatives of the Church. Constantius alto- 
gether exceeded his powers in ecclesiastical matters, and Valens 
became a scourge to the Catholic Church. Valentinian I. 
had espoused the orthodox faith, and gave the celebrated 
reply to a request that he would call a council, saying that it 
was not for him as a layman to decide upon ecclesiastical 
matters. But his attitude towards the Church was neverthe- 
less one of reserve ; and it was in his son, Gratian, that the 
Church greeted her first thoroughly filial subject amongst the 
line of Roman emperors. The first to refuse to wear the 
robe of the Pontifex Maximus, 2 he was the first to throw him- 
self into the arms of the Church and seek from her, in sub- 
mission to her laws, the power which he believed could alone 
make up for his desertion of the ordinary methods of obtain- 

1 Cf. Dollinger's Hist, of the Church, Period n. ch. v. § 1. 

2 Tillemont and Fleury think this improbable, bat of. Broglie, L'EgUse et 
Empire Botnain au IVmt SUcle (3me partie, pp. 294-299, 1866) for a j aster 
b tLm&te of the incident. 




—884 



GRATIAN AND ST. AMBROSE. 



235 



ing his subjects' support. 'It was not the emperor, bat the 
empire which on that day, by his lips, proclaimed itself 
Christian.' 

HI. Gratian was, indeed, over-persuaded by his first sur- 
roundings to a horrible deed of vengeance on the Count Theo- 
dosius ; but he presently came under a new influence, which 
determined his line of action in future, and may be said to 
have been the instrument in Divine Providence for sparing 
the Church from the expiring efforts of Arianism. St. Am- 
brose had mounted the throne of Milan: a man specially 
qualified to deal with the new state of things, from his ac- 
quaintance, during his secular life, with the principles of the 
civil order, and from his unswerving devotion to the orthodox 
faith after his consecration to the episcopate. Had Milan 
been the see of Peter, St. Ambrose would have been the cen- 
tral figure of the age ; but not even an Ambrose could make 
Milan the centre of the Church's unity. It was, however, his 
to direct the mind and action of the young emperor. The re- 
lationship between them was, according to Gratian himself, 
that of father and son ; and the extant letter of Gratian to 
St. Ambrose is a beautiful example of filial respect in the 
spiritual order. 

IV. Soon after Gratian's accession, his uncle Valens, lying 
wounded in a hut, was left by his attendants to burn to death, 
and Gratian succeeded to the entire empire. He took with 
him a copy of St. Ambrose's treatise on the true faith, as he 
repaired to Sirmium to enter upon his new honours ; and at 
once proclaimed liberty of worship for all sects except those 
which were disturbers of the public peace, such as the Mani- 
cheans, or were coming into prominence, such as the Photi- 
nians and Eunomians. And in this he appears to have after- 
wards thought himself remiss, as though it became a Christian 
emperor to forbid any heretics to worship according to their 
ill-advised conscience. It must be carefully borne in mind, in 
this connection, that heresy had invariably itself used the 
civil power when possible, and with an amount and kind of 
persecution to which neither Gratian nor Theodosius ever 
stooped, and that for most of the heretics of that time the 
only persuasive force was that of legal compulsion; but 



Digitized by 




236 



GRATIAN'S RESCRIPT GAVE 



A.D. 300 



1 



some time in the early part of his reign 1 Gratian appears to 
have adopted the measure which was of all others the best 
calculated to bring about the destruction of Arianism in the 
West. He decided upon making the exercise of spiritual 
jurisdiction in the West easier and more decisive by ordering 
that all bishops within the Western Patriarchate who rebelled 
against being tried by their brethren should be compelled, if 
cited, to appear at Rome ; and it should be the duty of the 
Prefect of Italy to expedite their appearance there. In the 
case of ' the more distant parts ' (such as Africa) the duty of 
trying the bishop lay with the metropolitan. We cannot say 
for certain that the earlier rescript contained more than this. 
It is not open to us to argue, for instance, with any certainty 
that the exact provision of the later rescript about the metro- 
politans was contained in the earlier. Our only data for 
deciding the contents of the earlier rescript (which is not ex- 
tant) are the instances of its violation given by the synod of 
878. These, it may be noticed, include Parma, which shows 
that the whole of Italy came under its purview, and also 
Africa. For both a bishop of Parma and a bishop in Africa 
are mentioned as having rebelled against the provisions of the 
earlier rescript. But the complaint against the African bishop 
appears to suppose a provision of the same kind as is con- 
tained for the regulation of matters ' in more distant parts ' 
in the later rescript. 2 

Thus Gratian made the execution of episcopal judgments 
easier than it had hitherto been. He did not create a patri- 
archate, but found one in existence. The jurisdiction of 
Rome, in its actual exercise, differed in the East and in the 
West. In the East it was for the most part exercised only 
directly over the patriarchs ; in the West it was exerted over 
individual bishops more directly. The Pope stood to the West 
in a double relation, that of ruler of the universal Church, and 
that of patriarch. And Gratian supplied facilities for the 

1 Possibly quite at the beginning — certainly so if this famous rescript is 
dated 378— for Florentius had been banished six years previously, in accord- 
ance, it would seem, with the earlier law. After six years 4 repsit in civitatem ' 
(cf. the letter of the Roman Council to Gratian). 

2 Consequently all that Mr. Puller says (Prim. SS. p. 157) about Gratian having 
enlarged the sphere of his earlier rescript in the later one falls to the ground. 





—384 CIVIL FORCE TO THE CHURCH'S ACTS, 237 

exercise of the patriarchal jurisdiction in the West, which were 
in perfect conformity with the subordinate character of the 
State in ecclesiastical matters. His great object, according to 
the synod of 378 and his own rescript, was to keep the trials 
of bishops to the episcopate. And in doing this he simply 
supplied legal facilities for executing the judgments of the 
episcopate, which were arranged in accordance with rules 
already established by its own action, as, for instance, at 
Sardica or Nice. 

Gratian's action was, we cannot doubt, inspired by St. 
Ambrose. The Bishop of Milan was himself interested in the 
new aid given to the administration of the Church. His own 
church came under the sway of the rescript, and, indeed, 
profited by it. The result was that after a few years the 
West was able, in the words (probably) of St. Ambrose, to 
report that there were not more than two Arian bishops left. 1 

V. Now, this civil aid granted to the judgments of the 
Holy See was considered by Newton, when he dipped into 
theology (sutor ultra crepidam), to be the starting-point of 
Papal jurisdiction. Merenda thinks it worth while to notice 
Newton's theory, but does not think it worth while doing 
more than notice it. Mr. Puller, however, has made it part 
of the backbone of his argument against the divine origin of 
the jurisdiction of the Holy See, ' Was I not right in saying 
that the pontificate of Damasus forms a new point of de- 
parture in regard to all matters connected with the growth of 
Papal jurisdiction ? 9 2 He compares the effect of Gratian's 
rescript in 378 with the mode of procedure sanctioned by the 
Council of Sardica, and considers that it was an enlargement 
upon the latter without any canonical basis. He thinks that 
' by one stroke of his pen the Emperor Gratian created, so 
far as the civil power could create, a patriarchal jurisdiction 
over the whole Western empire, and vested it in the Bishop 
of Rome/ 3 and that this was the only source of the Pope's 
patriarchal jurisdiction over Gaul, Britain, Spain, and Africa. 

1 Daring the winters of 378-381 Gratian was at Milan in closest inter- 
course with St. Ambrose, his spiritual guide. The rescript of Gratian must, as 
has been shown, be assigned to 380. 

2 Primitive Saints, dc. p. 159. » P. 157. 




238 



AND DID NOT MAKE 



A.D. 300 



Again and again he insists upon the paradox that the 
only patriarchal jurisdiction possessed by the Pope over the 
West came to him from the State, i.e. from this rescript — 
1 as State-made Patriarch of the West he had a jurisdiction 
derived from the emperor' 1 — 'it was in the time of Damasus 
that the State made the Pope Patriarch of the West.' 2 

Now (i.),if this was the case, where was the protest against 
such a violation of canon law ? What had become of all that 
enormous tenacity of the saints to the spiritual and inde- 
pendent character of the kingdom of God ? For saints there 
were most certainly ; indeed, it is impossible to suppose that 
St. Ambrose himself was not a party to this legislation ; 
whilst the bishops of the Eoman synod call the earlier rescript 
of Gratian that 4 sentence unquestionably most excellent and 
worthy of religious princes.' 8 Is it to be supposed that the 
bishops of that synod, who were themselves concerned, would 
thus go out of their way to dignify with the title of ' excellent ' 
a detestable act of Erastianism which deprived them of their 
own liberty ? For the synodical letter speaks of the Bishop of 
Parma as one who had evaded the earlier rescript ; and Parma 
was outside what Mr. Puller considers the area of the suburbi- 
carian churches, in which alone he thinks the Bishop of Rome 
had a 'full and commanding metropolitan jurisdiction' (p. 
182). This bishop had been properly deposed at Rome by 
the spiritual power ('dejectus judicio nostro'),and ought there- 
fore (they say) to have come under the ruling of the rescript 
to which they allude. In other words, their spiritual sentence 
ought to have had its civil effect. He ought no longer to hold 
his church, as they say he does, and the Bishop of Pozzuoli, 
although deposed, had crept back into the city ; whereas there 
again the spiritual sentence ought to have had its civil effect. 
The imperial official, the prefect, ought to have carried it out. 
Such instances show that according to that synod all that 
Gratian's rescript was meant to effect was the civil enforce- 
ment of spiritual judgments over an area in which those judg- 
ments ' ran ' by ecclesiastical custom. 

But (ii.), further, Mr. Puller relies on a passage in the 



> P. 182. 
"bid. 



Praeclara ista plane et religiosis principibus digna sentential 




—884 



THE WESTERN PATRIARCHATE. 



239 



synodical letter which he misinterprets. He thinks that 
' during the pontificate of Damasus the Emperor Gratian 
conferred on the Pope a very large measure of jurisdiction 
over the bishops of the whole Western Empire,' and that 'this 
jurisdiction received from the emperor had no canonical 
basis/ and this theory he bases on a comparison of the 
rescript of the emperor with the letter of the Eoman synod. 
The emperor, he says, was asked by the Eoman synod ' that 
contumacious bishops should be compelled by the prefect of 
the praBtorium of Italy, or else by the vicarius of the city of 
Rome, to come to Rome to be tried. This mention of the 
officials who were to coerce the refractory prelates limits the scope 
of the application of the enactment for which the synod petitioned 
to Italy and Illyricuvi. The emperor in his rescript brings in 
the prefect of the praetorium of Gaul and the proconsuls of 
Africa and Spain, and thus extends the system of appeals 
which he is establishing to the whole of the Western Empire, 
to Gaul, Britain, Spain and Africa.' 1 

Now a careful attention to the words of the Roman synod's 
letter will show that it is not the case that the mention of the 
officials limits the scope of the synod's petition to Italy and 
Hlyricum. 

The letter is addressed to Gratian and Valentinian alone, 
as being so entirely concerned with Western affairs. 2 It begins 
with saying that it redounds to their honour and piety that 
when the bishops 'almost innumerable from the various (dif- 
fusis) parts of Italy had gathered together to the sublime 
sanctuary of the Apostolic See, 3 and were considering what 
should be asked of the emperors on behalf of the state of the 
Churches, they could find nothing better to ask than what the 
imperial care and foresight had [already] spontaneously con- 
ferred upon them.' 

They then say that the emperors, full of the Divine Spirit 

1 P. 156. The italics are mine. 

* It is a mistake to suppose that the omission of Theodosius' name shows 
that this letter was written before his accession to the throne. There are 
several instances in the Theodosian Code in which the name of this or that 
living emperor is omitted. And here there is a reason for the omission, al- 
though it would not have been strange if it had been added. 

9 Mr. Puller omits these words. 




240 



THE ROMAN SYNOD'S LETTER 



a.d. 900 



and having the patronage of the Apostles [Peter and Paul] in 
their high estate, decided — for the restoration of the body of 
the Church, which the fury of Ursinus, in his endeavour to 
snatch a dignity which was not his due [i.e. the chair of Peter] 
had divided in twain — that, the author of the mischief having 
been condemned and the rest whom he had associated with 
himself having been separated from him, 4 the Bishop of Rome 
should have the trial of the rest of the bishops of the Churches, 
so that the Pontiff of religion should judge concerning religion 
together with his partners and [thus] no injury would be done 
to the episcopate, if a bishop were not easily subjected to the 
decision of a secular judge, as might often happen [before].* 

After enlarging on the superiority of the episcopal judg- 
ments, they say that they would end here were it not that 
Ursinus and his followers are evading the imperial sentence 
and wrongly remaining in their Churches, and conspiring in 
a rash and profane contempt, so as not to ' acquiesce in the 
judgment of the Bishop of Rome.' They were managing by 
bribes and threats of death [to the civil officials] to hold their 
bishoprics. ' Therefore we ask not for a new imperial decree, 
but the confirmation of the old.' They then instance the case 
of the Bishop of Parma, who, although deposed by an episcopal 
sentence, ' shamelessly holds his Church.' And they mention 
also Florentius of Pozzuoli, likewise condemned, who ' would 
have deserved a similar rescript.' They then mention the 
case of an African bishop who had evaded the rescript, refusing 
to have his cause tried before bishops ('apud episcopos'). 
And farther, the African Donatists were creating disturbance 
through one Claudianus, destined for bishop in the city of 
Borne. In spite of the imperial rescript, he too remains in 
Rome. They then say that the Jew Isaac went so far (allud- 
ing, it would seem, to what took place some years before, as an 
example) as to < attack the head of our holy brother Damasus 
with this deceitful aim, viz. that whilst he is on trial, who had 
been constituted judge over all, there might be no one to pass 
judgment on the lapsed, or at any rate on those who had 
seized on the episcopate.' But Damasus' innocence has been 
proved, so there is an end of that matter. t Now, therefore, we 
ask that your goodness would deign to order that whoever 




—384 



COVERED THE GROUND 



241 



shall have been condemned and shall have determined un- 
justly to retain his Church, or when summoned by an episcopal 
judgment shall have decided not to present himself, may be 
summoned to Rome by the illustrious prefects of the praetorium 
of your Italy, or by the vicar.' 

Thus far, it is true, the petition of the synod seems to 
limit the contemplated action of the rescript to Italy and 
Ulyricum. But the petition does not end here. For the 
synod proceeds to say : ' Or if a question of this kind shall 
have arisen in the more distant parts 9 (clearly such as are not 
contained within the above limits), 'the trial may be held be- 
fore the metropolitan for local decision (per locorum judicia), 
or if it is the metropolitan himself, he should be ordered to 
repair, of necessity, without further process, to Rome, or to 
judges appointed by the Bishop of Rome. And if the metro- 
politan or any other bishop shall be suspected, it should be 
allowed him to appeal either to Rome, or at any rate a 
council of neighbouring bishops.' It is clear that they are 
acting on the provisions of the Sardican (or Nicene) canons. 
Now, who was to deal in a civil capacity with these bishops 
in c more distant parts ' ? They were obviously beyond the 
reach of the prefect of the Praetorium of Italy or the Vicar of 
Rome. The synod did not enter into that question, possibly 
because it was obvious who were the officials that would 
manage the matter in these distant parts, or still more pro- 
bably because it was not their business to say. The emperor 
in his rescript does, naturally, mention the officials who would 
enforce the episcopal sentence or the transference of venue 
in these more distant parts, and thus he covers the ground 
occupied by the petition of the synod. Otherwise the rescript 
would have fallen short of the synodical request. They 
mention the officials who would necessarily superintend the 
cases which they specify as actually pressing ; it was un- 
necessary or beyond their competency to mention the others, 
but their request goes beyond the jurisdiction of these officials 
into 1 more distant parts.' It is therefore not the case that 
Gratian was * extending the system of appeals,' as Mr. Puller 
puts it; he was merely facilitating the mode of procedure 
which had already commended itself to the Church. 'The 



R 




242 



OF GRATIAN'S RESCRIPT. a.d. 800-884 



more distant parts ' are but covered by his rescript, as they 
had pleaded in their letter. 

Nor is it correct to say or suggest that there is nothing in 
the correspondence to show that the bishops were resting 
their case on higher and strictly Papal grounds. The open- 
ing of the synod's letter, which speaks of the bishops having 
gathered together from various parts of Italy 1 ' to the sublime 
sanctuary of the Apostolic See,' is suggestive ; and they speak 
of Damasus, compared with other bishops, as being 'equal 
in office, 2 but he excels in the prerogative of the Apostolic 



And if we go outside the actual letter, as we have a right 
to do in search of the context, we know that St. Ambrose, 
probably the virtual author of the rescript, 8 considered that 
Damasus sat in the chair of Peter, 4 and he held Peter to be 
the rock in Matt, xvi., 6 and taught that from the Church of 
Eome 1 the rights of venerable communion flow to all.' 6 

Mr. Puller says, ' It sometimes seems to me that eccle- 
siastical historians have hardly done justice to the immense 
importance of this act of imperial legislation.' But two or 
three words slipped into an imperial rescript were at the best 
a slender basis whereon to rest so enormous a superstructure 
as the patriarchal jurisdiction of Rome over the West. And 
at least it should be absolutely certain that even this basis is 
sound ; whereas it seems quite certain that it is itself without 
foundation, for the words in Gratian's rescript, appealed to 
by Mr. Puller, cover no more ground than did the actual 
petition of the Roman aynod. 

1 4 Ex diffusis Italia partitas.' Mr. PuUer (p. 156, note 1) has no right to 
limit this to the suburbicarian churches. I do not know why he puts asterisks 
in place of the words * sublime sanctuary of the Apostolic See.' 

3 I.e. what we should call order, as distinguished from jurisdiction, his 
■ prerogative ' embracing the latter. 

3 It was written during the period when the emperor spent the winter with 
St. Ambrose at Milan. 

* 4 Peter the Apostle, who was Bishop of the Roman Church ' (Da Socrom. 
lib. i. § 5). 

* Cf. his hymn Ipsa Petra canente. • Mansi, t. iii. p. 622. 



oee. 




CHAPTER XVI. 



THE COUNCIL OP CONSTANTINOPLE (A.D. 381). 



§ I. — Theodo8iu8 and the Imperial City. 



I. In January 879 Gratian decided upon a step which both 
reflected the greatest credit upon himself and was fraught 
with far-reaching consequences to the fortunes of the Church. 
After the death of his father by Gratian's order, Theodosius the 
son had retired into private life. Gratian drew him forth 
by the magnanimous offer of half his empire, which, as De 
Broglie says, 1 Theodosius first refused with modesty and then 
accepted with simplicity. History presents few more touch- 
ing pictures than that of these two young men, of rare virtue, 
the one forgiven, and the other forgiving, entering upon the 
government of the empire with devout attachment to the 
Christian faith. For during his winter's stay at Thessalonica 
Theodosius, who was by parentage, so to speak, an orthodox 
Christian, 3 but not yet actually enrolled in the Christian 
army, fell ill of fever, and in fear of death called upon St. 
Ascholius, Bishop of Thessalonica, to baptise him, having 
previously ascertained that the bishop had never given in to 
the Arian heresy. He arose from his sick bed to exercise the 
virtue of divine faith which he had received through the 
waters of regeneration. As he surveyed his imperial charge 
a huge scene of religious conflict presented itself to his sight 
For nearly half a century Constantinople had been under the 
influence of heretical bishops, and the scene of the most dis- 

1 Cf. the whole account in Broglie, L'Eglise et VEmjrire Romavn au IVme 
Sticle, Sme partie, p. 857 seq. 1866. 

* ' &V«6«»r i»Jkv 4k *poy6vwv Xpurruwbs fadpx*y, koI rfj rov tyoovclov wlaru vpoc- 
icc ffttrof (Uoc. 6). 



B 2 




244 



THE EASTERN EMPEROR ENFORCES 



A,D. 800 



graceful turmoils. Each heresy, as it emerged, found its home 
there, and the Catholic faith had wellnigh disappeared 
when Gregory left Nazianzus to do his best to revive it in 
this New Rome, as they delighted to call it. 

II. Theodosius determined at once to strike a blow for the 
true faith. But how was he to define that faith? The 
Nicene Creed was the very subject of contention, and each 
formula that was promulgated by way of explanation had 
been twisted into a new heresy. He decided to begin by 
insisting on the observance of the rule of faith itself. He 
would not — as a devout layman he could not — issue any 
dogmatic definition, but he could insist on the norm of 
religious truth being observed, such a rule as no Christian 
could dispute, and as no Christian did dispute qua the rule. 
In regard to the heresy that was creating fresh confusion at 
Constantinople, Damasus and the Roman synod had issued 
a clear decision, and it was accepted at Alexandria by the 
successor of St. Athanasius. What could be better calculated 
to reduce to unity the scattered forces of religion than to 
recall the Easterns to the true centre of teaching? He 
therefore ordered that the religion delivered to the Church of 
Rome by the Apostle Peter, as expounded by the Pontiff 
Damasus and by the present Bishop of Alexandria, should be 
preached by all Catholics. < We will that all people who are 
governed by our clemency should practise the same religion 
as the divine Apostle Peter delivered to the Romans, as the 
religion proclaimed by him up to this time declares it ; and 
which it is clear the Pontiff Damasus follows, and Peter, the 
Bishop of Alexandria, a man of apostolic sanctity — that is, 
<fec. Those who follow this law we order to take the name of 
Catholic Christians.' 1 

Now, nowhere do we discover a single note of surprise at 
the East being thus called upon to practise ' the religion of 
the Romans.' In fact the evidence afforded by the incidental 
notice of the Apostle Peter is of the most irrefragable nature, 
to the effect that the Christian world, East and West, had 

1 'CunctoB populos quos dementi® nostra regit temperamentum in tali 
volumus religione reread qoam divinura Petrum Apostolam tradidisse religio 
usque none ab ipso insinuata deolarat.' 




-384. 



THE FAITH OF ROME. 



245 



learnt to look to the See of Peter as the central authority on 
matters of faith. The religion practised by the Vicar of Jesus 
Christ, and now held by the chosen successor of St. Athanasius, 
such was the form of faith delivered from the throne of the 
imperial neophyte to the Eastern world. It is clear that 
Theodosius draws a distinction between Damasus and Peter 
of Alexandria of a vital character. Damasus is the pontiff, 
Peter the bishop ; Damasus is mentioned simply as the 
pontiff, Peter as a man of apostolic sanctity, as though some 
reason needed to be given for tacking on his name to that of 
the pontiff. His adherence to the religion delivered to the 
Bomans by the Apostle Peter was worth mentioning ; it sug- 
gested what Theodosius required of his own East, viz. a 
similar adherence. Borne, then, is indicated as the centre ; 
Borne in its connection with the Apostle Peter, and Borne 
as the seat of the Pontiff of the Christian religion. 1 

Did Constantinople resent such a description of the 
Christian religion ? Was it an idiosyncrasy of the young 
emperor's ? 

It is clear that it was, at any rate, the teaching of St. 
Ascholius of Thessalonica, whose religious pupil the emperor 
had become, and Constantinople was unable to say that the 
faith of Old Borne was not the norm for the faith of New Borne. 
She received her new emperor with open arms, so St. Gregory 
tells us. 2 There were soon to be plenty in that city prepared 
to disagree in fact with Borne, and some, as we shall see, in 
theory ; but not the saints or the theologians of the East. 
Prosper of Aquitaine expressed the conviction of the day as 
he sang: 

Sedes Roma Petri que pastoralis honoris 
Facta caput mundo.' 

III. The state of things in Constantinople, whither the new 
emperor now prepared to go, was as follows. St. Gregory, 
whom the Church specially dignified with the name of 1 the 

1 Of coarse the word ' pontiff ' could be used of any bishop, but it is here the 
distinction of terms that is to be noted occurring in a legal document. 

* ' Gupidus accessit ad sibi cupidissimos 1 (Carmen de Vitd sua\ 1805). 

* I*. ' Rome the Bee of Peter, which has been made to the whole world the 
head of the pastoral office.' 



Digitized by 



246 



CONSTANTINOPLE AND 



A4D. 800 



theologian/ had stirred the city by his eloquent preaching of 
the true faith, seconded by his great holiness. Tou might 
see St. Jerome sitting an eager listener at his expositions of the 
faith, whilst St. Gregory made use of his unrivalled knowledge 
of the text of Holy Scripture. But also you might see a 
figure wrapped in the mantle of the philosopher, and leaving 
the oratory with the classical staff and his hair in philo- 
sophical disorder, full, to all appearance, of enthusiasm for 
the eloquent bishop as he refuted the Arian, the Eunomian, or 
the Macedonian. Warned against this man, whose name was 
Maximus, Gregory nevertheless took him into his confidence, 
and even alluded to him in the way of defence in one of his 
public orations. But presently Maximus threw off the mask, 
and after having intrigued with the enemies of Gregory, in- 
duced some Egyptian bishops with (unhappily) the consent 
of Peter of Alexandria, to consecrate him to the see of Con- 
stantinople. Gregory had thus rendered himself ridiculous 
in his support of Maximus, and in the bitterness of his dis- 
appointment retired. On his reappearance to bid a final 
farewell, the people of Constantinople, enraged at the appoint- 
ment of Maximus, suddenly settled that the only remedy was to 
make Gregory himself their bishop. The scene that ensued 
seems to have baffled description — Gregory resisting, men 
throwing themselves on his person and forcing him into the 
episcopal chair, and women crying out, ' If you leave us, you 
take away with you the Holy Trinity ' 1 — i.e. the true faith. 
Gregory consented on condition that his election obtained 
conciliar sanction, and at once retired a little way into the 
country. Maximus repaired to Thessalonica to gain the ear 
of the emperor, 8 from whom he met with an unfavourable 
reception, and forthwith he turned to Alexandria, where he 
was also coldly received by Peter. 

IV. Such was the state of things when Theodosius ap- 
proached Constantinople. He seems already to have formed 
the idea of an Eastern council, and to have consulted St. 
Damasus in regard to it, through Ascholius, who appears, 
from an incidental expression in Damasus' reply, to have 

• *vpfK0a\fU yip, e?T€, aavT$ Tpid&a (Carmen de Vitd sud, 1100). 
■ CI. Broglie, loc. cit. p. 404. 




—884 



ST. GREGORY NAZIANZEN. 



247 



been for some time past in the position of Papal vicar at 
Thessalonica. 1 The Pope replied to Ascholius in favour of a 
council, and condemned the election of Maximus. The letter 
reads like a private one, so much so that it has been doubted 
whether it is genuine ; but the verdict of scholars is in 
favour of its genuineness, and that being so, it seems per- 
fectly clear that the council had the approval of the Pope. 
It was, however, so far merely an Eastern assembly — in no 
sense an oecumenical gathering. 

Theodosius approved of the nomination of Gregory, and 
the settlement of the whole matter of the bishopric was 
handed over to the council ; but meanwhile the emperor 
went a step further in the direction of maintaining the true 
faith. In January, 881, appeared a short edict forbidding all 
heretics to assemble for divine worship. He also went a step 
further in defining a heretic. He had bidden all Catholics to 
follow the religion taught by the Pontiff Damasus, and, as a 
matter of fact, by Peter of Alexandria, and had spoken of the 
consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity as part of that faith ; 
he now specified the teaching which obtained at Borne con- 
cerning the consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit. 2 Theodoret, 
in describing the effect of this decree, says that the churches 
were now to be given to those who held 'the faith of 
Damasus. 3 

Thus the consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit with the 
Father and the Son was at once a matter of faith, and now also 
a matter of civil obligation for Catholics, before the council met. 
The French bishops, in their letter to Innocent X. in the 
seventeenth century, admitted that the anathemas of Damasus 
were irrevocable before the Council of Constantinople ; and 
the law of January 881 shows that Theodosius did not con- 
ceive of these bishops meeting to discuss an open question. 

1 1 Hoc est quod sape dilectionem vestram common ui, ne fieret aliquid in- 
considerate ' (Ep. v.). For the opposite view maintained by Mr. Puller, relying 
on the words of Innocent I. to Anysius and Rufus, cf. Prim. SS. p. 162. The 
Pope's words only show when the emperor gave civil sanction to the arrange- 
ment, not when Damasus made it. 

« Cf. Theod. De Religione Decreta, lib. xvi. tit. v. 6 ; Migne, Patr. LaU vol. 
xiii. 

» Hist, Eccles. v. 3. 




248 



THE COUNCIL OF 



A.D* 900 



And St. Gregory treated the question as closed in his preach- 
ing to the people, to the chagrin of some, friends of Mace- 
donia, but with the consciousness that they were standing 
alone in the Catholic Church. 



I. Meletius was already on the scene to institute St. 
Gregory into the bishopric. 1 We may picture to ourselves 
the meeting of St. Jerome and St. Meletius, the uniform 
magnanimity of the latter and the enthusiasm of the former 
for his newly acquired master, St. Gregory, binding the two 
together. There were many saints at this Eastern council, 
which began so well and ended so unhappily. St. Basil's 
brother, St. Gregory of Nyssa, joined the little throng gathered 
round the eloquent and mortified bishop of the same name, the 
choice friend of St. Basil, who had passed from his labours on 
earth to his work of intercession in heaven. Meletius was the 
hero of the hour ; he had already synodically expressed his 
agreement with the ' Tome of the Westerns ; ' * his people 
were in the enjoyment of intercommunion with the disciples 
of Paulinus ; 3 he had arranged with the latter that whoever 
survived the other should be the sole Bishop of Antioch. 4 
There were, for the present, two Bishops of Antioch, but that 
had been recognised by 'the West,' 5 and consequently he 
came as the symbol of what the young emperor hoped, and 
the saintlier souls in the East sighed after— continued peace 
with the West 6 and the inauguration of peace amongst them- 
selves in the East. 

The first business of the council was concerned with the 
bishopric of Constantinople itself. Maximus had been con- 
demned by Damasus in a private letter to Ascholius meant 
for the emperor's ear. He condemned his appointment to 
Constantinople on the grounds that it was done by externs, 
the ceremony performed at an unusual hour, without consul- 

1 Socr. H. E. v. 8. « Antiochene Synod, 879. 

• Theodoret. H. E. v. 8. 4 Greg. Naz. Cam. de Vitd aud. 
» Ep. Condi AquU. 5. Cf. Dam. Ep. v. 

* Letter of the Italian bishops to the Easterns (881), *dadnm.' Mansi, t. 
iii. 628. 



§ II.— The Council. 




CONSTANTINOPLE, a.d. 381. 



249 



tation of the clergy and people, and that the very appearance 
of Maximus was, according to accounts, that of a philosopher 
rather than of a Christian. 1 At the same time there were some 
difficulties about the election of St. Gregory, which probably 
account for the matter being reopened later on, and for the 
election of Maximus finding favour for a while, in spite of his 
character, with the law-abiding West 2 before they had full 
information on the subject. 

The council was presided over, in the natural course of 
events, by St. Meletius. There were no Papal legates, for 
the council had not been convoked as an oecumenical 
assembly. Alexandria was not yet represented ; it was in 
mourning round the death-bed of its patriarch, the saintly 
Peter. The Bishop of Antioch was, therefore, the natural 
president, according to ecclesiastical custom, Antioch being 
the third of the greater sees of Christendom, the third see of 
Peter. The ordination of Maximus was investigated and re- 
pudiated, and so far the East was placing itself in harmony 
with the West — so far as the judgment of the latter was 
known. St. Damasus had urged St. Ascholius to use his 
influence with Theodosius previous to his leaving Thessa- 
lonica for the appointment of some bishop against whose 
election there could be no objection from a canonical point of 
view. 3 Whether this could be said as to St. Gregory's elec- 
tion opinions may differ. He had been consecrated by St. 
Basil Bishop of Sasima, and had acted as Bishop of Nazian- 
zus out of affection to his father's memory. However this 
might be thought to affect the canonicity of his election 
(translation from see to see being the great flaw in Eastern 
elections and the source of some of its greatest troubles), his 
election was confirmed, and it seems as though his first act 
was to intercede for the Egyptian consecrators of Maximus. 
They were spared the usual censure. 

II. Difficult as it is to settle the order of transactions in 

1 Damasi, Ep. v. 

* If this be the true account of the matter there would be nothing unnatural 
in a council in the West treating of the subject, on which Damasus would not 
naturally consider the opinion given by him in his letter to Ascholius as irre- 
fonnable. 

• Dam. Ep. v. 




250 



ST. MELETIUS DIES. 



this council, of which we do not possess the Acts, it seems 
almost certain that they must have at once proceeded to con- 
sider the dogmatic question, 1 and were probably interrupted 
in their work of proposed pacification by an event which 
altered the whole course of events for some years to come. 
Meletius died — not, as Canon Bright expresses it, ' a saint 
outside the communion of Rome,' 2 but a saint of chequered 
career, who, originally recognised amongst the bishops of 
the East by the Pope Liberius, of mild rather than uncom- 
promising nature, yet a magnificent confessor of the faith as 
against the Arian Euzoius, having thrice suffered exile, was 
for a while distrusted at Rome, but after publicly signing the 
' Tome of the Westerns,' was welcomed by Rome as Bishop of 
Antioch in her archives. Some while ago he had made the 
advances to Paulinus which led to a formal compact as to 
their successor, and he had now endeared all hearts to himself 
at Constantinople. He ended his life with inducting into the 
see of Constantinople her first orthodox bishop for more than 
forty years. He had perhaps also agreed to the principle 
embodied in the so-called fifth canon of the council, that all 
at Antioch should be acknowledged as orthodox who, whether 
they spoke of one or three Hypostaseis, acknowledged the one- 
ness of the Godhead of the Father, the Son, and the Holy 



HI. The death of Meletius was an event which not only 
plunged the city of Constantinople into a profound gloom, and 
was felt throughout the East, but it introduced a complication 
into the subject of the Antiochene disputes. After a funeral, 
in which the procession of bishops and clergy and others, with 
their lighted tapers in hand, is described as illuminating the 
city, and after the body of the saint had left to enter, on its 
way to Antioch, cities into which, in accordance with the 
sentiment of the time, no corpse had been allowed to be borne, 

1 De Broglie seems to think that the dogmatic question was not dealt with 
at all till later on, which is, of course, possible. But I hope to show that it is 
more probable that the course of events was as I have described it. 

* Hist, of the Church, p. 172. 

1 Cf. Canon v. This was a reversal of the judgment of St Basil on the 
subject. The actual canon was probably drawn up at a later council in 888. 



Ghost. 3 




—884 



UNEDIFYING BISHOPS, 



251 



the bishops met to consider the question of St. Meletius' 
successor. It was a question which ought never to have been 
submitted at all. 1 Its proposal can only be accounted for by 
the state of the Eastern episcopate at that moment. The 
Emperor Valens had scattered bishops over the East to sup- 
port the cause of Arianism, who were quite unfit for the sacred 
office, and many of these liad ' conformed ' upon the edict 
of Theodosius, without a religious conviction of any kind. 2 
Their main sentiment was a deep-seated hatred of the West, 
which had supported the orthodox faith. They were violently 
Eastern, because they were but faintly orthodox. These 
men, St. Gregory tells us, had come all sunburnt from the 
plough, or from the smith's anvil, or the office of the petty 
scribe, or the baker's shop, or from handling the oar, or from 
the rank and file of the army. 

A great deal is sometimes said about the authority of the 
Second Council and the galaxy of saints that are supposed to 
have promulgated the third canon, and to have proposed a 
successor to St. Meletius. St. Leo, with his provoking 
accuracy, describes the men who did this part of the busi- 
ness as ' certain bishops.' St. Gregory considered them the 
offscouring of the episcopal body, and the very dregs of the 
Christian community. He distinctly states, as Tillemont 
points out, referring to St. Gregory's account of the council, 
that there were men loaded with gold who set to work to 
corrupt the bishops. 3 As long as Meletius lived, the question of 
the compact which he had made did not press, and they 
would probably have considered it too dishonourable to provide 
for the perpetuation of the state of strife which St. Meletius 
plumed himself on having brought to a peaceful issue with 
the consent of the West. But now came the difficulty ; that 
some of these bishops would have to be under Paulinus, whilst 
with others there was the still greater difficulty that they 
would be giving in to the West. Behind Paulinus they saw the 
Pope, and the Pope was to these abandoned men the symbol 

1 Tillemont says of this that 'some enemies of peace proposed in the 
council a thing of which they ought never to have dreamt ' (St. Greg, de Nae* 
art. lxxi. p. 475). 

Cf. Tillemont, St. Greg, de Nat. art. lviii. p. 441. Paris, 1703. 



1 hoc. cit. 




252 



IN SPITE OF ST. GREGORY, 



a.». 800 



of the Homoonsion. They could not deny the truth of the 
latter nor the rights of the former. They never in the whole 
strife objected that Lucifer had offended against the canonical 
rights of the East in consecrating a Bishop of Antioch. 
Neither St. Basil, nor St. Gregory, nor even these quarrelsome 
men, seem ever to have suggested that obvious flaw, as it 
must have been considered, unless the Papal regime was, in 
principle, acknowledged throughout the East. St. Basil 
distinctly refused, totidem verbis, to decide against the validity 
of the consecration. St. Gregory assumed its validity through- 
out. A fact such as this is of vital import in determining the 
general current of Eastern thought as to the canonical rela- 
tionship of the West to the East. But these half- Christian 
bishops (as St. Gregory calls them), at Constantinople, whilst 
they could not plead a lack of canonical validity in Paulinus' 
consecration, did demur to the shadow of Western patronage 
which lay on the rights of Paulinus. They had learnt to 
cherish a certain unchristian bitterness against the West, 
whilst others were influenced (to a less extent) in the same 
direction because the West had refused them the particular 
mode of support which under the leadership of St. Basil they 
had claimed in their struggle against Valens. Tillemont 
attributes their malignant spirit to this, and also to the spirit 
of ' pride, pique, and jealousy.' 1 

St. Gregory indignantly repudiated the dishonourable 
course on which they were embarking. He rose above their 
1 low reasons/ as Tillemont calls them — ' reasons/ he adds, 
1 unworthy of a bishop. He sought only the will of God, the 
honour of the Church, and the good of souls/ a He deprecated 
their miserable attempt to turn the question of religion into a 
question of astronomy. He urged them, instead of advancing 
the miserable plea that things should go from the East, where 
Christ was born, to the West, and not vice versa, to think more 
of our Lord as the first-fruits of the whole human race, and 
to allow themselves 4 to be a little conquered/ 8 

' This/ as Canon Bright remarks, 1 was clearly the right 
course/ 4 St. Gregory said that it was pardonable in them 

1 Loc. cit p. 476. * Ibid. 

' Carm. de Vitd sud, 1690 and 1653. 4 Hist of th$ Church, p. 178. 




—384 



ELECT FLAVIAN. 



253 



* in some measure to vex ' 1 the West during Meletius' lifetime, 
and when they were uncertain how he would be received (as 
-was the case before the peace was made), being annoyed — 
defenders, as they say, of the laws 2 — but now he considered it 
-wanton and inexcusable. Paulinus (he urged) could not live 
long, and so he entreated this ' mob of youngsters,' 3 to rise 
above this false patriotism and act for the peace of the 
Church. He told them plainly that he might resign 'his 
throne, but not his opinion.' 

But 'party feelings proved too strong for this good 
counsel.' 4 

Flavian, who, it is to be feared, had promised not to 
accept the bishopric, was elected. He had been St. Meletius* 
right-hand man, and even if he had not definitely agreed to 
the compact, it was a sad sight to see one who had been so 
intimate with Meletius entering upon his new charge by a 
violation of that saint's most cherished hope. It was a sure 
renewal of the breach with the West which St. Meletius had 
so carefully closed, and it was a deliberate prolongation of 
strife at the very heart of the East. 

IV. St. Gregory's disappointment may be imagined rather 
than described. His high soul, eager for the peace of the 
Church, revolted from the rude and contemptuous attitude of 
the uneducated and undisciplined band of young bishops 
who secured a sufficient majority to carry the dishonourable 
proposal. He no longer attended the sessions regularly, and 
since they were held in the episcopal palace, he soon removed 

1 Carm. de Vitd sud, 1614. 

9 Mr. Puller's translation (Prim. 88. p. 251), 4 these self-styled defenders of 
the canons/ is not a correct rendering of the original. There is no irony in 
his words. 

• Cam. de Vitd sud, 1636. 

4 Canons of tlie First Four Councils, by Canon Bright, 1892, p. 110. Mr. 
Poller's account of this deplorable incident is distressingly apologetic and, it 
most be added, inaccurate. He calls it the action of the (Ecumenical Council, 
and he says : 4 It is, I think, allowable to express regret that the bishops at 
Constantinople did not ratify the compact in the interests of peace. What 
they actually did was canonically legitimate, but it may be doubted whether it 
was wise or charitable ' (p. 248). St. Gregory thought it morally wrong. De 
Broglie thinks that the influence of this saint had waned since the Maxim us 
affair. This is possible ; but the reasons St. Gregory gives are sufficient. Tille- 
mont'e piety here fortunately gets the better of his Gallicanism* 



Digitized by 




254 



ST. GREGORY RESIGNS. 



jLd. 300 



to another dwelling. The council was thus without a regular 
head, and the friends of St. Gregory were withdrawing from 
participation ; it was, in fact, nothing in itself but a small 
Eastern synod. 

What was the young emperor doing all this while ? In 
the spirit of a Christian ruler he held himself aloof from the 
strife, but he sent for his spiritual father, St. Ascholius, from 
ThessaJonica, who, as belonging to the Western Patriarchate, 
had not attended the council. 1 

At the same time a new element of disturbance entered 
upon the scene. The Egyptians arrived with their new metro- 
politan (or patriarch) Timothy. Tillemont remarks that they 
had been delayed a by the necessity of arranging matters on 
the accession of Timothy. 

The Egyptians felt themselves compromised by the affair 
of Maximus, and that they had been pardoned rather than 
justified — a humiliation which they owed to Gregory. 8 To add 
to the complication, the bishops who came at Theodosius' 
wish from Ulyricum brought with them what St. Gregory calls 
a sharp 1 Western breeze.' 4 They must have felt a somewhat 
disdainful compassion for the intricate quarrels of the East, 
compared with their own steady simplicity of faith. They 
were specially scandalised at the constant translation from 
see to see in the East, and neither they nor Timothy of 
Alexandria approved of Gregory's elevation to the see of 
Constantinople. They looked upon the argument that he had 
never gone to his original see, and had only administered his 
father's see provisionally, as insufficient; and the whole 
council became a fresh scene of confusion. Gregory forth- 
with announced his resignation, which was received with 
a respectful silence. The fact was that he had proved too 
uncompromising in his preaching to please those who origi- 
nally hailed his promotion, and too mortified in his life for 
the fashionable capital of the East ; consequently there was no 

1 This is the simplest solution of the difficulties raised in one direction by 
Papebrooh, May 9, Acta Sanctorum, and in another by Tillemont, St. Greg, de 
Nag., note 43, p. 717. 

* Loc. cit. St. Gregory says : i^axlvrjs K*K\i}fx*voi, but probably means that 
they came suddenly, having been originally invited. 

• De Broglie, loc. cit. p. 435. 4 Carm. de Vitd sud, 1802. 




—384 



NECTAKIUS IS ELECTED. 



255 



section sufficiently enthusiastic in his favour to counter- 
balance the displeasure of Alexandria and the Egyptians. 
The Egyptians were in accord with St. Gregory in deprecating 
the selection of Flavian for Antioch, but this was not sufficient 
to counteract their dislike to his intrusion into the see of 
Constantinople in place of Maximus, for whom they had no 
respect from a moral point of view, but whose election they 
considered canonically valid. 

St. Gregory, therefore, resigned in the interests of peace, 
and delivered a farewell address, which for theological exact- 
ness combined with pathetic eloquence has hardly its equal in 
Christian literature. He was a man not born to rule such 
elements of discord as then met in the Byzantine capital ; but 
for holiness, and orthodoxy, and polished eloquence he had 
hardly a peer in that century. He made his will in the presence 
of several bishops, leaving what he had to the poor of Nazian- 
zus, whither he now retraced his steps. On his way he 
passed by Caesar ea, the scene of his beloved Basil's labours, 
and after delivering a panegyric there on his brother saint, 
retired to his father's city of Nazianzus. 1 

V. The council had now lost its two greatest saints — 
Meletius and Gregory, and with St. Gregory several of his 
friends appear to have more or less withdrawn themselves. We 
may safely reckon amongst these St. Gregory of Nysea and 
HeUadius, and the little throng that had gathered round their 
master, the ' Theologian,' as he was called. 

It was necessary to elect another bishop. Amongst the 
names presented to the emperor was that of a civil dignitary, 
whose life had been somewhat free, though irreproachable of 
late, and who in consequence had delayed his baptism. We 
may guess, though we cannot say for certain, under whai in- 
fluences his name was entered on the list proposed by the 
bishops. The emperor selected him, and he received all the 
sacraments at once. His appointment was a scandal and 

1 Bofinus says that men had never seen a holier and more blameless life, 
more brilliant eloquence, a purer and more orthodox faith, more perfect and 
consummate knowledge. Tillemont has a beautiful description of his preach- 
ing. He used to say to the Third Person, • Thou art my God, and I shall not 
cease repeating— yes, Thou art my God.' 



Digitized by 



256 



TILE MACEDONIANS RETIRE. 



a.d. 800 



promised ill for the Church. Constantinople and Antioch 
were thus, both of them, filled with bishops on whose election 
a cloud rested. But both of these bishops happily belied their 
bad beginnings. Flavian, indeed, ended as a saint, and Necta- 
rius set to work to do his duty in good earnest. It must 
have been now that the council addressed itself to the work of 
bringing the Macedonian heretics to the acceptance of the 
full faith concerning the consubstantiality of the Eternal 
Trinity ; but it had lost its one guiding spirit in theology in 
the retirement of St. Gregory, and its main power of peace- 
making through the death of Meletius. The Macedonians 
could not have been impressed with what they had seen of the 
bishops so far, and they simply refused to accept the teaching 
that was proposed to them. The imperial influence was 
brought to bear upon them, but in vain. The emperor 
pressed upon them the submission they had made to Pope 
Liberius, but they simply left the council, leaving a letter of 
warning to their followers as to anything that might be done 
in favour of the Nicene Creed. They had found that the Nicene 
Creed involved not merely the Homoousion of the Son, but 
of the Holy Spirit, and one can well imagine that the bishops 
of the synod had lost their moral influence after the incidents 
that had marred their sessions hitherto. 

VI. But this council has nevertheless taken a high place in 
the consciousness of Christendom, having attained to the rank 
of one of those Four (Ecumenical Councils which St. Gregory 
spoke of as next to the Four Holy Gospels. How was this ? 
It was for one act, which brought the East into harmony with 
the West, and which was confirmed by the Popes. The de- 
parture of the Macedonians may have had the effect of has- 
tening 1 the agreement of the bishops in a formula which 
had already been in use for years, and which expressed the 
synodical teaching of St. Damasus on the subject of the Third 
Person of the Holy Trinity. We do not know how or when, 
after what discussion, if any, the said formula was adopted ; 
we only know that it was not new, and that it was adopted. 
It had already been called by St. Epiphanius the Creed of the 



1 So De Broglie. 




—884 



THREE POINTS CLEAR. 



257 



Churchy and the faithful had been required to learn it, almost 
as it now stood, by heart. If formally adopted after St. 
Gregory and his friends had withdrawn, we may fairly as- 
sume that there had been some discussion before the death of 
St. Meletius, and that St. Gregory and others had left their 
proxies or their signatures for the said doctrinal decree. And 
the list of signatures, as we have it, suggests this. It is clear 
that the signatures are not those of the bishops given at any 
one session, they must have been placed together more or 
less at random ; but it is reasonable to suppose that the sig- 
natures were each of them attached to some document, though 
not all to the same. The signature of Timothy of Alexandria, 
or again of St. Meletius, were neither of them, as the said list 
would imply, attached to the third canon ; for Alexandria 
never accepted it, and St. Meletius died before it was drawn 
up. But it is reasonable to suppose that St. Meletius might 
be claimed as having accepted the form in which the Nicene 
Creed had been frequently recited by way of explication (with 
the approval of individual bishops in their several dioceses) 
before the council met, and that Timothy signed at the council 
itself. Consequently, the scribe finding both signatures, en- 
tered them as though they were attached at the same session 
and to the whole of the council's doings. 

Although we have no Acts, no record of the discussions, 
nor even of the order or number of the sessions, we have 
nevertheless the clear testimony of history to these three 
points — viz. that the enlarged form of the Nicene Creed, such 
as was already in use in some parts of the East, and was in 
harmony with the teaching of St. Damasus' ex cathedrd pro- 
nunciation in the Roman synod, was agreed to by a sufficient 
number of bishops to make it the act of the council ; next, 
that the ordination of Flavian to Antioch did not meet 
with the approval of the council as a whole; and, lastly, 
that the third canon was, if it was mooted in this council 
at all, not the judgment of the 150 Fathers, but of a por- 
tion only. These are the broad facts for which there is 
historical evidence ; beyond this we seem to be in the region 
of mere conjecture. When Mr. Puller speaks of 1 so many 



s 




258 



THE THIRD CANON. 



a.d. 300 



great saints ' 1 having approved of Flavian's ordination, he is 
met with St. Gregory's statement that it was only a ' crowd of 
youths/ and those of a very unsaintly character, who suc- 
ceeded in drawing after them some of the ' older stars.' When 
certain writers speak of the third canon as though it possessed 
the authority of the Church, they need to be confronted with 
St. Leo's determined accuracy in calling it only the decree 
of 'certain' bishops; but when the Council of Chalcedon, 
eighty years afterwards, admitted the Council of Constanti- 
nople into a rank which was denied to it by the Council of 
Ephesus, it recognised a patent of orthodoxy as having been 
conferred upon its one unanimous act — viz. the enlargement 
of the Nicene Creed — a development by way of explication, 
embracing the truth which Rome had already pronounced to 
be of faith, and which the Emperor Theodosius had already 
decided to enforce on those who wished to be called Catholic 
Christians. The synod thus rose at length from a mere 
Eastern assembly of great saints, mixed up with a crowd of 
unedifying bishops, summoned to bring the East into line 
with the West on the subject of the Third Person of the 
Eternal Trinity, to the rank of one of those four oecumenical 
councils which exhibited the faith of the Church on the co- 
equality of the Son and the Holy Spirit with the Eternal 
Father, and the Divine Personality and perfect human nature 
of the one Mediator between God and man. 



Before proceeding further, it will be well to consider briefly 
the so-called canons of this Second General Council. One of 
them plays such a conspicuous part in the controversy between 
our Anglican friends and ourselves that it calls for special 
attention. 2 It has been contended by the former for the last 
three centuries, that the Council of Chalcedon set its seal to 
the principle that the primacy of the See of Eome (whatever 
that primacy may involve, whether actual jurisdiction or 
merely a position of honour) was due to the secular position 

1 Prim. 88. p. 148, note 1. 

* 'That the Bishop of Constantinople should have the prerogatives of 
honour after the Bishop of Borne, because it it New Rome.' Canon HI. 



§ O. — New Rome, or the Third Canon. 




—384 



WHEN WAS IT PASSED? 



259 



of the imperial capital. This will be considered at length 
when we come to that council. But the action of that coun- 
cil, whatever it be considered to involve, was based on this 
third canon of the Council of Constantinople. Hence the 
necessity of considering this canon with care. 

Its history is involved in great obscurity. When was it 
passed ? Not, we may safely assert, after Timothy of Alex- 
andria had arrived at the council, unless it were after his 
departure; neither could it have been passed whilst St. 
Gregory was president. No one who has read ever so little 
of his writings at this time will suppose that he would have 
given his consent to a measure so certain to frustrate his 
cherished hopes of peace, and prompted by the spirit of over- 
reaching which he so emphatically denounced. One hardly 
sees, therefore, how it could have been passed at all. Canons 
were always drawn up at the close of a synod ; but this could 
not have been the case here, by reason of the presence of the 
Bishop of Alexandria and the Egyptians, who never accepted 
the regulation contained in this third canon. Neither is there 
room for it in the previous sessions, considering, not merely 
St. Gregory's presence, adverse to such a proposal, but his 
account of the synod, which makes no allusion to it. 

Was it, then, a canon of the council in the strict sense 
of that term ? 

In considering this question, we must bear in mind that 
it was never sent to the West, and that, consequently, when- 
ever passed, it was considered not to be a canon which con- 
cerned any but the Easterns themselves. It was not, it would 
seem, sent even to Alexandria, possibly on the ground that it 
was not considered to affect the question of jurisdiction. On 
the next vacancy in the See of Constantinople, Alexandria 
acted as its superior, and placed St. Chrysostom in the vacant 

It may be said, however, that this was done in defiance of 
the canon, just as at the next General Council (as it was in- 
tended to be) Alexandria occupied the seat of president, above 
Constantinople, at the order of the emperor himself. But 
had it been a canon in the ordinary sense of the term, it could 
hardly have been so completely passed over in both cases. 



0 2 




260 



DIFFICULT TO SAY. 



aj>. 30O 



Bat, farther, on the first occasion on which it was publicly 
quoted at a General Synod, the Western bishops present 
denied that it was amongst the canons of the Chorch at alL 

And the evidence is strong to the effect that it was not 
contained as a canon even in the oldest Greek versions of the 
canons of the Church. In the Latin version of the canons called 
the Prisca, which drew its list from very ancient Greek manu- 
scripts, it is placed after the Council of Chalcedon, as though 
it had made its first appearance, as an oecumenical rule of 
action, on the occasion of that council, and there is fair 
ground for supposing that it was missing in the earliest ver- 
sion of the Isidorian collection of canons. Now these two 
versions, the Prisca and the Isidorian, supply us with our 
earliest information as to the most ancient Greek manu- 
scripts. 

Much doubt, therefore, hangs over this supposed canon 
on these grounds. 

Add to this the fact that the first canon is generally 
admitted to be not so much a canon as a part of the Tome 
which was drawn up by the council, and that the fifth and 
sixth canons are now admitted by all scholars to belong to a 
second council held in the following year ; whilst the seventh 
is not a canon at all. On all these grounds we have reason 
for hesitating to call this, which comes in their midst, a canon 
even of the Eastern Church. 

And yet the subject must have been mooted and settled 
by some authority. Now, Socrates puts the regulation con- 
tained in this canon before the confirmation of the Nicene 
Creed. His account cannot be depended on as giving the 
order of time ; but his placing this decree, as he calls it, by 
itself, before the time came, according to him, for the canons 
about bishops keeping to their provinces and looking to pro- 
vincial synods for the transaction of provincial concerns, 
seems to suggest that it stood on a different footing from 
theBe. It is certainly remarkable that the council of the 
following year, in giving a detailed description of what was 
done at the council of 381, mentions the subject-matter of the 
so-called first canon and of the second, as well as the ordina- 
tion of Nectarius and Flavian, but makes no allusion to this 




—884 NOT CONCERNED WITH JURISDICTION. 261 



third canon. Of coarse, this might be due to a conviction on 
their part that Borne would never accept the new arrange- 
ment. But if it really was one of the first three canons pro- 
perly enacted, and they mention the subject-matter of the 
first two, but keep silence as to this, we have to suppose them 
guilty of a dishonourable reticence. 

We are therefore driven to the conclusion that the decree 
of which Socrates speaks, and to which they allude in their 
letter to Theodosius, stood on a different footing to the second 
and fourth canons. It was an arrangement on which they 
agreed amongst themselves after Timothy had left, and which 
would therefore concern any future ecclesiastical intercourse 
between Alexandria and Constantinople. It had nothing to 
do with jurisdiction, but related to the mere question of 
honorary precedence (irpea/Bela rrjs rifif)?). It did not concern 
Borne, as it would have done had it related to jurisdiction ; 
for in that case they knew well Borne would be obliged to 
have her say. It was, after a time, slipped in amongst the 
canons. 

Theodosius, in his law of July in that same year, adopted 
the new order of precedence in naming the prelates who in 
«ach region were considered orthodox. But this might be 
due to the petition of the bishops concerning their new decree, 
not to its figuring amongst canons of the council; though, 
indeed, it would be unsafe to argue much from the order in 
the law of July 30, because the persons named therein are so 
named, not because of the dignity of their sees, but their 
personal merit. 

It is, however, certain that Theodosius approved of the 
move, and one cannot but see the hand of the quondam civil 
functionary, 1 now bishop of the Byzantine capital, in the 
whole matter, and consequently Socrates may be so far right 
in placing this decree immediately after the ordination of 
Nectarius, that it was due to his particular influence. Theo- 
dosius naturally sanctioned, if he did not also promote the 
arrangement, for although a good Christian, he was an 
emperor. His successor set it at nought when precedence 
would have involved jurisdiction, as at Ephesus. 



1 Nectarius. 




262 



CONTAINS TRUTH AND FICTION. 



A.D. 300 



The reason given in the canon for thus exalting Constan- 
tinople over Alexandria contains a carious mixture of fact 
and fiction. 1 Because it is New Borne * was the ground 
assigned. Now it was true that the precedence of Old 
Borne over the West, viewing the West as its patriarchate, 
was in one sense due to her being the capital of the empire ; 
but it was an arrangement which was made by Borne herself 
in virtue of her higher relationship to the Church. She 
chose to rule a portion of her world-wide spiritual dominion 
in the character of Patriarch as well as Pope 1 — that portion 
which came at this time under the civil rule of the West, 
of which Borne was the capital, though not now the imperial 
residence. It is therefore true, as Canon Bright has said, 
that ' the representation ' contained in the canon was ' un- 
faithful to the facts/ 2 i.e. untrue, for ' it is certain ' (as the 
same writer has elsewhere said) 1 that the Bishop of Borne 
enjoyed this pre-eminence not simply because his city was 
Borne, but also because he held the chair of Peter.' 8 At the 
same time, whilst wrong in supposing that patriarchal honours 
could be assigned to a capital because it was a capital by 
themselves and the emperor, they were right in implying 
that the patriarchate of the West came about (in one sense) 
through Borne being the capital; only it was through the 
choice of the blessed Apostle Peter and his successors select- 
ing the Papal for a Patriarchal centre. We have no reason 
to suppose that this was meant to be denied. 4 Their mistake 
may have consisted in imagining that such a matter as even 

1 « In the decrees of the bishops of Borne the distinction between their 
supreme and patriarchal jurisdiction is not always fully observed ; the latter is 
often supported and exalted by the former ; the one influences the other, and 
not unfrequently both flow on together : that is, the bishops of Borne perform 
many things both as Popes and Patriarchs. The Popes themselves do not 
always draw the precise line of distinction ; they possessed, indeed, both 
powers as successors of St. Peter, and often appeal even in acts which were 
connected immediately with their patriarchal authority to their supreme pon- 
tifical power * (Dollinger, Sist. of the Church, Period II. cap. v. § 4). 

* Canons of the First Four General Councils, by W. Bright, D.D., Canon 
of Christ Church, Begins Professor of Eccles. Hist., 1892, p. 107. 

1 History of the Church, by W. Bright, D.D., 1882, 1892, p. 178. 

4 It seems inconsistent with the submissive tone of the letter sent in 382 to 
Borne to suppose that they in any way questioned the supremacy of the See of 
Peter. 




— SS4 



DISAPPROVED IX THE WEST. 



263 



honorary precedence, when il concerned two of the three 

Petrine Sees (Alexandria and Antioehi, couki 

these Eastern bishops, or thai honorary prectu 

for any length of time divorced from actual jurl 

be they thought to bar in the future such at : 

Peter of Alexandria in allowing his bishops to ordain \f.ivf- 

idob to Constantinople; and it might not on ^em 

that Antioch, considering her long-standing <■ 

be better protected by Constantinople if the latter held the 

place of honour. And they could count on Flavian, in his 

present position, owing (as he did) his election to the 

bishops of the council, acquiescing in an arran. 

commended itself to the political and military : .... - 

Theodosius. 

But there mingled with this a certain lust of eanhly 
honour which culminated in the great schism which was con- 
summated through the unrestrained ambition 
and most unscrupulous prelate that ever managed to intrude 
himself into that ill-fated Byzantine see. The decree which 
goes by the name of the Third Canon of Constantinople 
was the germ of the successful mendacity of the arch-rebel 
Photius. 

§ IV.— The Western Disapproval of the EUeti Flavian 

to Antioch. 

Thus far, then, the synod was thoroughly ar ; 
Eastern, in its composition, its range of action, and its 
internal discord. There was no idea of its aspiring to At 
rank of an oecumenical synod. But whilst it e 
confusion and disagreement in regard to t 
troubles, it nevertheless placed itself in line with the West 
in the matter of dogma. But they sent no official report to 
Borne, conscious, doubtless, of the impossibilit 
Borne to accept their choice of Flavian. The account, how- 
ever, of what had taken place necessarily readied the West, 
and was animadverted upon by a council that met that 
year in September to consider the case of two bishops who, 
although teaching Arian doctrine, refused to be numbered 
amongst the Arians. These bishops desired to be tried before 



Digitized by 



264 



THE WEST ASKS FOR A FULLER 



a.d. 300 



an oecumenical synod ; but St. Ambrose and (we may pre- 
sume) St. Damasus considered that a small but influential 
council of thirty-two neighbouring bishops was sufficient to 
adjudge their case. It was not a representative synod of the 
West, neither Home (where Damasus was pressed by fresh 
opposition from his old enemy Ursinus) nor Spain being re- 
presented, although their letter to the East implies that they 
were acting in unison with Damasus. 

Its president was a great and holy bishop named Valerian, 
and its ruling spirit was St. Ambrose himself. This council, 
which met at Aquileia, addressed a letter to the Emperor 
Theodosius, which is of importance as showing that the West 
had long ago accepted the compact between St. Meletius and 
Paulinus as to the survivor being sole successor at Antioch. 
They say that, owing to the dissensions there, they had intended 
sending legates from the West to compose the strife, 1 but that 
1 since our desires could not take effect at that time owing to 
public disturbances, we presume that our petitions were pre- 
sented to your Piety, in which we asked, in accordance with a 
compact between the parties, that on the decease of one the 
churches might remain in the hands of the survivor, and 
there should be no attempt to ordain anyone over his head.' 

Such had been their previous petition, after they had 
heard of the compact made before the Antiochene Synod of 
a.d. 879, in which St. Meletius and his friends signed the 
1 Tome of the Westerns ' and sent it to Rome. This, however, 
had now been rendered useless, owing to what had taken place 
at Constantinople. 8 Accordingly they proceed to say : i And 

1 1 Qui sequestres et arbitri refundendae, si fieri posset, pacis existerent ' 
(Mansi, t. iii. p. 623). 

* Mr. Puller rests much of his argument (Prim. 88. p. 249) concerning the 
continued existence of the breach with Borne and St. Meletius on this letter and 
the succeeding one from Milan. He argues that the Council of Aquileia did 
not know of what had taken place at Constantinople, and henoe made a 
proposal about the survivor of either bishop at Antioch. But this is impossible 
for two reasons, viz. : (1) it is impossible to suppose that they would ask for a 
' fuller council ' at Alexandria (as they did in this letter) before they knew the 
issue of the council at Constantinople, and (2) they knew of Theodosius' law of 
July, for they thank him for passing it, and this law was passed subsequently 
to the Council of Constantinople, and brings in the name of Nectarine, who 
was ordained at that council. 




—384 



COUNCIL TO DEAL WITH 



265 



therefore we ask and beseech yon, most clement and Christian 
emperors, to convoke the whole body of Catholic bishops to a 
council to be held at Alexandria, who may fully discuss and 
settle the question as to who are to be admitted to communion 
and who are to have their communion with us maintained.' 

They had said in the same letter that they were bound to 
have a care for the Paulinists at Antioch, because they had 
long ago received the letters of both sides. 1 What they intimate 
is, that they cannot throw over Paulinus and his followers, 
which the acceptance of Flavian would involve. They had 
once hoped to send legates, but that being impossible under 
the circumstances, they had sent letters which they think the 
emperor must have received, 2 in which they had asked for 
the imperial sanction of the compact entered into by the two 
aides. That compact having been set aside, i.e. at the Council 
of Constantinople, they now ask for a General Council to meet 
at Alexandria, and consider 1 to whom communion should be 
given and with whom it should be maintained ' 3 — i.e. whe- 
ther they should extend their communion to the followers of 
Meletius now placed under Flavian. For themselves they 
wish the compact to stand ( c quod stare volumus '). We learn 
from Sozomen that several at Antioch at once decided to join 
the party of Paulinus, as they presumed St. Meletius would 
have wished them to do, and so these Western bishops say 
that they do not wish any of these to seem neglected, ' who also 
in accordance with the compact, which we desire should stand, 
have asked for our communion.' 4 They therefore ask for a 
fuller council (' ccetu pleniore ') than that of Constantinople, 
which will have a better chance of restoring peace. 

Very shortly after this, another council seems to have 
met at Milan, 6 in which the bishops came to the conclusion 
that it would be better to have the council at Borne itself, to 
decide the affair of Nectarius, whose ordination they considered 

1 * Utrinsqne partis dadum accepimus literas ' (loc. cit). 

* ' Oblatas pietati vestro opinamur preees nostras. 1 

* Mauri, t iiL p. 634. 

* ' Qui et paoto, quod stare volumus, communionem nostram rogarunt ' (loc. 
«&). 

* So Hefele and others think. Mansi makes the letter only a second from 
Aqnileia. 



Digitized by 



266 



THE DISHONOURED COMPACT. 



a.d. 300 



illegitimate. From what follows we may assume that St. 
Damasus himself, whilst he would have supported Gregory as 
against Maximus, felt that Maximus' ordination had elements 
of canonicity which were lacking in the case of Nectarius. 1 
The letter of this Council of Milan further censures the 
election of Flavian in place of Meletius. They say that the 
confusion which had recently (' nuper,' i.e. at Constantinople) 
taken place is indescribable. Things now stand thus, * We 
had written long ago ' (' dudum,' i.e. long before the Council of 
Constantinople, alluding to the letters spoken of above as 
having been sent instead of legates, after they knew of the 
compact between Meletius and Paulinus) ' that, since the city 
of Antioch had two bishops, Paulinus and Meletius, whom we 
considered to agree in faith, either peace and concord should 
be established between them without detriment to ecclesiastical 
order, or that, at any rate, whichever of them died before the 
other, there should be no election in the place of the deceased 
whilst the other lived. But now that Meletius has died . • • 
it is said that one has been not so much substituted as intruded 
into his place.' ' And this is said to have been done with the 
consent and by the advice of Nectarius, the regularity of 
whose ordination does not seem clear to us. For in the council 
lately (nuper), 9 &c. 

Now from this letter we gather that there had been no 
formal notification of the enactments at Constantinople, but 
that information had reached them, as it must have done even 
before September (the date of the Council of Aquileia) as to the 
course of events at Constantinople — and information of a 
sufficiently precise nature to justify them in writing about it 
to the emperor, and calling it a state of inexplicable confusion. 
Further, they allude to letters which had been sent to the 
emperor concerning the compact long ago ( c dudum ') — that is, 
as compared with the Council of Constantinople, of which they 
speak as comparatively recent ( c nuper '). These could only have 
been the letters to which the bishops at Aquileia alluded as 
having been sent previous to the Council of Constantinople. 

1 This explains the apparent change of front on the part of Damasus. It 
is, however, quite possible that it was a real change of mind in consequence of 
information as to what happened at Constantinople. 




—384 



HISTORICAL CONCLUSION. 



26T 



Now that the compact had been set aside, they ask for a 
larger council. It is therefore quite certain from these letters 
that when St. Meletius went to Constantinople he was a bishop 
accepted by Rome, 1 and absolutely certain that he died in 
communion with Home. 2 Indeed, considering what has been 
advanced above, 3 it may be safely said that he had been in 
communion with Rome during the interval between the Synod 
of Antioch (879) and his death. And further, no case has 
been made out for the assertion that he was ever excommuni- 
cated by Rome. It must be remembered that the refusal to 
acknowledge a person as bishop is by no means equivalent to 
excommunication, and again, that the refusal of letters of 
intercourse may mean something much less than a decision 
that the person to whom they are refused is under the 
eXcommunicatio major. 

Note. — It will be seen that I have drawn a perfectly opposite 
conclusion from the above letters to that deduced by Mr. Puller, 
'Prim. SS.' pp. 247-251. He regards them as containing a demon- 
stration that St. Meletius was out of communion with Rome at 
the time of the Council of Constantinople. It may well be asked, 
Whence this difference ? It originates in the simple fact that Mr. 
Puller has disregarded the ordinary rules of grammar in his trans- 
lation of the first letter. He translates the past tense in the Latin 
by the present in English. 'Oblatas pietati vestrro opinamur 
preces nostras, quibus partium pactum poposcimus, ut . . . per- 
manerent . . . attentaretur,' is all in the past. But Mr. Puller 
actually translates poposcimus 1 we pray/ and oblatas as 1 should be 
offered,' and permanerent as ' may remain ' (p. 250), which alters 
the whole sense. He then, to make it more complete, understands 
nunc Meletio defuncto as meaning that the bishops at Milan had now, 
i.e. since the Council of Aqwleia, heard of Meletius' death. One 
could wish that Mr. Puller had restrained himself a little in making 
such sweeping accusations about others rendering history an 
impossibility as he has indulged in on p. 827. Nothing surely can 
equal the hardihood of turning the past tense into the present, and 
then making the passage thus translated the pivot of his argument 
as to the relation of St. Meletius to the See of Peter. As has been 

1 They speak of ' two bishops.' 

* They had * long ago ' sent letters to both. ■ P. 229. 



Digitized by 



268 



MR. PULLER'S VERSION. 



a.d. 800—884 



seen in the text above (cf . also note to p. 264), what the bishops are 
speaking of when they wish the subject of whom they should admit 
to communion to be dealt with, is the state of things that had arisen 
in consequence of Flavian's election, not the matter of communion 
with St. Meletius, 'Prim. SS„ p. 260 (last line).' So that instead 
of its being 1 perfectly clear from this letter that St. Meletius up to 
the time of his death was still cut off from the communion of the 
Western Church, which was so fully represented at Aquileia ' 
(p. 251), it seems perfectly clear that the exact opposite is the truth. 
As for the West being ' so fully represented at Aquileia,' that is a 
minor matter, but it is difficult to see how the West could be fully 
represented, without Rome or Spain, by thirty-two bishops. So 
that on p. 251 (last line) of Mr. Puller's book the word ' Flavian ' 
should be substituted for the words 1 St. Meletius ' — in other words, 
the whole superstructure of argument so laboriously built up by Mr. 
Puller falls to the ground. 




CONCLUSION OF SECOND PERIOD. 



§ I. — Councils of Constantinople and Rome (882). 

Before closing the second period it will be well to take a- 
rapid survey of the action taken by the East and West in 
regard to the council which met at Constantinople in 881 r 
in order to see how the whole matter ended in peace for the 
distracted East. Two great synods were held, one at Con- 
stantinople and the other at Borne, in 882, instead of a larger 
one of East and West in one place. 

I. The West having (p. 266) expressed its dissatisfaction 
with the doings of the council at Constantinople in regard to the 
appointment of Nectarius to Constantinople and of Flavian to 
Antioch, now demanded a General Council, and suggested 
Alexandria as the best place wherein to meet. What Theo- 
dosius actually did was to summon a fresh synod to Constan- 
tinople. Meanwhile St. Damasus (for by the West we must 
understand St. Damasus and the Western bishops) proceeded a 
step further and proposed a General Council to meet at Borne. 1 
This invitation, however, came too late. Numerous bishops 
had already met at Constantinople and left their dioceses for 
the time that would be required for a synod there, and had not 
made arrangements which would permit of their extending 
their journey, neither (it would seem from what they say) 
had they met at Constantinople in such numbers as would be 

1 Theodore! speaks of ' the West ' calling for a council of Easterns and 
Westerns. But, as Merenda observes, everybody knows (' nemo qui nesoit ') that 
by this expression the Pope is frequently meant (Qesta 8. Damasi, cap. xx. 
§ 2). Merenda also thinks that the letter written by the Emperor Gratian to 
Damasus about assembling a synod, mentioned in the Lib. Synodic, cap. Ixxiv. 
refers to the Council of Aquileia. 




270 



THE EAST ADDRESSES ROME 



a.d. 300 



required for an oecumenical council of East and West. This 
they stated in their letter, which they at once wrote to 
St. Damasus and the Western bishops. In that letter, after 
cordially 1 responding to the desire of the West to bring 
matters to a peaceful issue, and speaking of themselves as 
* members 9 of the West (as containing, it might perhaps be 
fairly argued, their head 2 ), they say that ' it was indeed our 
wish, if possible, to leave our Churches in a body and gratify 
the need or desire/ i.e. of repairing to Borne. * For ' (they 
continue) c who will give us wings like doves to flee away and 
be at rest with you ? ' In the West was their true home — 
so the expression used implies ; 3 there was their mother, who 
could gather them under her wings and give them shelter 
and peace. But this, they plead, was simply an impossibility 
at present. It was impossible to leave their Churches for so 
long, or to send notice to the other bishops. They had 
already « flocked in eager haste * to Constantinople 4 1 in conse- 
quence of (Ik) the letters sent by your Worthiness last year 
after the synod at Aquileia, 5 to the most God-loving Emperor 
Theodosius.' It would therefore now be impossible to let the 
other bishops know. This last reason throws some light on 
this Synod of 882 at Constantinople. It was not the 150 
Fathers who met, except by representation. Of course, we 
know that St. Gregory of Nazianzus refused to attend; 
and we do not know how many others did the same. They 
themselves call the synod of the last year (' ir&pvaS [881]) 

1 Several writers on the subject imagine that these Eastern bishops were 
not sincere in what they said. There is absolutely nothing in the words they 
use to convey the notion of hypocrisy. 

2 Of course they might mean only to speak of being members one of 
another, but the context suggests the above meaning. 

• Mansi, t. iii. p. 583 : wphs fym*. Cf . the well-known expression in St. 
John i. 1, wpb* rhv ec4r, indicating the infinite communion of the Son with the 
Father, the mrirh Bt6rrrros. The Greek preposition in such contexts is equiva- 
lent to the French ' chez vous.' Jerusalem was the mother-Church as the 
older ; Rome was their mother as the present centre of the Church. 

4 <rwMp<m'f)Kan*v y lit. * We had run together.' 

* It is therefore evident that the order of things was this. St. Damasus, in 
concert with the bishops at Aquileia, had proposed a council at Alexandria. 
The Easterns were at once summoned by Theodosius to Constantinople, where 
they received the subsequent invitation to Borne which is recorded in the 
letter from the council held (as is supposed) at Milan. 




—384 



IN FILIAL TERMS, AND ADOPTS 



271 



oecumenical, not their own — a term which they could hardly 
have meant to use even of that in its full significance, unless 
in the sense that the dogmatic decisions, being but an echo of the 
pronouncements already promulgated in the West, witnessed 
to the universal acceptance of the teaching of the Eoman Synod 
of 872. Probably, however, they used the word in the same 
way that the Africans used the word universal, i.e. of a Synod 
of All Africa. 

This whole letter is a witness to the fact that the East had 
no idea of such a thing as the independence of national 
Churches. Neither provinces, nor even the whole of the East, 
felt themselves at liberty to plead that they could manage 
their own affairs without reference to the West. 1 

They then proceed to say that they had adopted the next 
best course (& Sevrspov fy) by way of righting matters and 
showing their love 2 for the Western bishops. 'We asked 
Cyriacus, Eusebius, and Priscianus to undertake the work 
willingly of going to you, and through these we show our own 
peaceful determination, and how we aim at unity.' They 
then describe their faith in exact accord with the teaching 
sent originally by the Eoman Synod (872) on the subject of 
the Third Person of the Holy Trinity, and they refer to St. 
Damasus and the Westerns for a further explanation of their 
faith to a certain doctrinal formulary, which they speak of as 
4 the Tome which was adopted 3 at Antioch by the synod as- 
sembled there, and to the Tome put forth last year at Con- 
stantinople by the (Ecumenical Synod.' This passage proves 
two things : first, that the Council of 882 did not regard itself 
simply as a session of the Council of 881, but as a separate 
synod ; and secondly, that the so-called Fifth Canon of the 

1 The letter of Theodosius quoted by Mr. Puller (Prim. SS. p. 274) does not 
exist ; and though it did once exist, it probably had nothing to do with this 
matter; and, if it had, it was denounced by St. Ambrose as erroneous in its 
teaching (of. Appendix III. p. 479). 

* I feel myself quite unable to take the line that these bishops were mere 
hypocrites. Without rating them too high, they must have had the courage of 
their opinions sufficiently to say so, if they were, as some suppose, all the while 
offended with the West. At any rate, they thought it best to say the exact 
opposite. They were not the same as those of the previous year. 

• I have thus translated ytyirnntyy, as being a word which does not neces- 
sarily imply that the bishops at Antioch drew it up themselves. 




272 



THE 'TOME OF THE WESTERNS/ 



a.d. ZOO 



(Ecumenical Council belongs to the assembly of the Second 
Synod of 882. 1 The Council of 881 put forth a Tome, and 
the Council of 382 embodied it in a canon. 

What, then, was the * Tome of the Westerns,' the doctrinal 
formulary adopted at Antioch and identical at least in sub- 
stance with that put forth at the (Ecumenical Council of Con- 
stantinople ? Hefele has furnished most convincing proofs * 
that it was the doctrinal formulary addressed by St. Damasus 
and his synod of 869 to the East, sent formally and officially 
in 372 in response to St. Basil's entreaties for help. It was 
all that St. Damasus had seen it in his power to do at that 
time. He settled the faith, as contained implicitly in the 
Nicene Creed, concerning the Third Person of the Holy Trinity, 
and sent back the Eastern legate, Dorotheas, with this formu- 
lary. For the rest, he could but wait on Divine Providence 
to come to the aid of the East. It came in the form of an 
orthodox Eastern emperor, who entered upon his career of 
pacification by insisting on his subjects, who wished to be 
called Catholic, practising 1 the religion delivered to the Roman* 
by the Divine Apostle Peter,' as taught now by the Pontiff 
Damasus, with whom at that time the saintly successor of 
St. Athanasius agreed. 

So that the object which Theodosius originally had most at 
heart when, on leaving Thessalonica shortly after his baptism, 
he summoned a general council of the East at Constantinople, 
had now been achieved. The 1 faith of Damasus ' had already, 
according to Theodoret, been made the touchstone of ortho- 
doxy at Antioch when the prefect Sapor decided to whom the 
churches held by the Arians should be handed over. The 
emperor had further been able to point in the previous year 
to Nectarius, Timothy, Helladius, Gregory of Nyssa, and others 
in his law of July, 381, as the orthodox centres in the East, 
for each of these could now be said to hold, on the vexed 
questions of the day, that which ' the religion taught up to 
this time declares to have been delivered to the Romans by 

1 The canon runs thus : * As to the Tome of the Westerns, we also recog- 
nised those in Antioch who confess one Godhead of the Father and Son and 
Holy Ghost.' 

9 They seem to me to amount to demonstration. 




—384 



THE GREAT ROMAN SYNOD 



273 



the divine Apostle Peter.' And now the council assembled at 
Constantinople (382) to establish peace could report that their 
* (Ecumenical ' Council of the previous year (881) had professed 
the same faith, and they were able to tell the West that they 
unanimously accepted in the East the doctrinal formulary 
which had issued from Borne in the midst of their troubles 
under Valens, and had been accepted by St. Meletius and his 
synod at Antioch, two or three years previously, and by the 
more General Council of 881. 1 So far, then, as the faith 
was concerned, the East had now been brought into line with 
the West. 

But peace was not yet restored ; for the new Bishops of 
Constantinople and Antioch had not yet received the assent of 
the Bishop of Borne to their appointment. Meanwhile the 
council, which had been originally intended as oecumenical, 
met at Borne, shorn of the Eastern contingent that met at 
Constantinople, but one of the most remarkable synods as 
concerned its composition that had assembled during the 
reign of Damasus. 

There was St. Ambrose himself, the foremost prelate of 
his time, the spiritual guide of the Western emperor, and the 
spiritual father of the great Augustine ; the metropolitan of 
the city (Milan) selected by the emperor for his frequent 
residence; a bishop who has more vividly impressed his 
memory upon the West than perhaps any other Western saint 
of that critical time. 

The great Bishop of Thessalonica, St. Ascholius, who had 
baptised the Eastern emperor, had also come with the special 
desire of meeting St. Ambrose in the flesh. He came in his 
anchorite's garment, and found his brother saint ill in bed. 
St. Ambrose himself describes their meeting, 2 their long 
embrace, the tears they shed. 

There was the great St. Jerome, the student of Holy 
Scripture, who had drunk in the theology of St. Gregory of 
Nazianzus from his own lips, to whose inspection St. Gregory 
of Nyssa had submitted his writings, and who was one day to 
be the instructor of St. Augustine himself. 

There was, above all, the great Saint Epiphanius, one of 

1 It had not yet the right to the title (Ecumenical * Ep. xt. n. 10. 



T 




274 



THE MEETING OF THE SAINTS. 



A.D. 800 



the greatest men of the day ; bom in Palestine, brought up 
a Jew, converted by the sight of a monk giving away his 
garment to clothe a beggar; the friend of St. Athanasios; 
inhabitant of the Thebaid as an anchorite, where the monas- 
teries rang with the fame of his many miracles ; drawn oat 
of his cell against his will and made Bishop of Salamis — a 
man consulted by East and West, profoundly versed in 
Hebrew and Syriac and Greek, one who had investigated 
to its depths every heresy, and who was called ' the Apostle, 
the new John, the herald of the Lord.* 

These great saints were now in the city of St. Peter and 
St. Paul. And there was one object, which must have had 
a special interest for them at that time — the chair of Peter. 
St. Damasus had built a new baptistery, and placed the 
chair of Peter in it, to which the description he put up in 
this baptistery alludes — 



St. Optatus, the African bishop, had lately written his 
work against the Donatists, and in answer to their boast that 
they had a successor of Peter in Borne, having consecrated a 
bishop for Borne, named Macrobius, for their own sect, he had 
written thus, ' In fact, if Macrobius be asked where he sits in 
Borne, can he say, In the Chair of Peter ? — which I am not 
aware that he has ever seen with his eyes, and whose shrine 
he, as a heretic, has never approached.' 

St. Ambrose, St. Ascholius, St. Epiphanius, and St. Jerome 
may be thought of in devout reverence at the shrine of Peter, 
one in their faith, as expressed by St. Ambrose in the Council 
of Aquileia, that from Borne 'the rights of venerable com- 
munion flow abroad to all.* 1 

Unfortunately, the Acts of this important synod have 
perished, and we can only guess at its decisions by the action 
of the West towards the East subsequent to the assembly. 

Hitherto St. Damasus had expressed his disapproval of 
Maximus' appointment to Constantinople privately, before the 
appointment had been made ; * but the Council of Aquileia, 

1 Mann, 1 iu. p. 622. » Dimu. Ep. ad Asehol 



Una Petri sedes, unum verumque lavacnxm.' 




-384 



RESULTS OF THE SYNOD. 



275 



which met by his authority, 1 and was presided over by 
Valerian and attended by St. Ambrose, who was its ruling 
spirit, had asked for a general council at Alexandria, in con- 
sequence of its being obliged to say in the name of the West 
that the arrangements of the Council of Constantinople (881), 
concerning either Maximus, who had apparently appealed to 
it, or concerning the see of Antioch, would never meet with 
their approval. 

But the Council of Milan had gone further, being doubt- 
less in possession of further details. It had protested against 
the appointment of Nectarius, and asked the emperor to 
send his bishops to Eome. That most extraordinary man, 
Maximus, had appeared in the West, having probably dropped 
his yellow wig and philosopher's mantle and staff, and had 
claimed the privilege of appeal. He had not handed in an 
appeal whilst in the East, and hence his case did not techni- 
cally come under the operation of the Niceno-Sardican canon. 
But the principle of that canon might fairly be invoked,* 
and the council did claim that the East should act in 
accordance with its provision. 3 The East ought to have 
waited for the sentence of the West, the council says. It dis- 
claims the idea of making itself the court of first instance, 
but claims to be consulted in the matter. 4 It was one which 
could not be concluded in the East ; there must be a common 
judgment.* 

All this must have been reviewed, at the great synod at 
Borne in 882, by the Pope, by St. Ambrose, St. Epiphanius, 
St. Ascholius, St. Jerome, and the bishops in synod. What 
they decided can only be conjectured from the sequence of 
events, which was as follows: — Maximus was disowned by 
the West, the two consecrators of Flavian were excommuni- 
cated, but towards Flavian himself Borne maintained silence, 6 

1 Cf. VdUsii Nota apud Sozom. lib. vii. c. 9 ; and Merenda, Oesta Damasi 
(Migne, p. 328). 

* Viz. that no bishop should be appointed daring an appeal to Borne. 

* Mansi, t. iii. 632. Not mentioning the canon, bat obviously arguing upon 
its lines. 4 Prsrogativam examinis (Ambr. Ep. ziii.). 

* A common judgment is not necessarily one in which all parties are on a 
par, and all contribute the same amount of authority, bat in which all, head 
and members as well, join. • <ri«nrV fixer (Soz.). 



t 2 




276 



THE APOLLINARIAN HERESY. 



neither passing actual sentence upon him nor admitting his 
claim — placing him, in fact, in much the same position as 
that held by St. Meletius before 879, i.e. neither excommuni- 
cated nor adopted by Rome 1 — whilst the East applied to 
Rome for its approbation of Nectarius, thus acting in accord- 
ance with the request of the Council of Milan, that the matter 
should not be concluded in the East. Theodosius did not 
consider Nectarius' position safe without Rome's approval ; 
accordingly, a solemn embassy of bishops and imperial 
officials 2 was dispatched to Rome for her approbation, the 
emperor asking for a letter of communion to 'confirm the 
episcopal position' of Nectarius. 3 The Council of 882 had 
used an expression in the end of their synodical letter to 
Damasus to the same effect ; they express a hope that 
Damasus and the West will 1 congratulate ' them on what 
they had done — a courteous ecclesiastical formula to request 
confirmation. 4 

It seems also that the Apollinarian heresy was dealt with 
at the Roman Synod (882). St. Damasus would be particu- 
larly anxious for consultation with such as St. Epiphanius 
and St. Ambrose on this subject. The condemnation of that 
heresy had been one of the great works of his reign. It had 
sprung, as so many heresies, from a zealous opposition to one 
form of error leading to an error on the opposite side. In 
opposing the Arians, Apollinarius came to imagine that our 
Lord's freedom from sin was incompatible with the possession 
of a human soul, and that the possession of two natures, each 
entire and distinct, was inconsistent with the Unity of His 
Person. He, therefore, denied that our Lord had a human 
soul in its higher element or operation (a rational soul), and 
asserted that this was supplied by His Divinity. As you 
entered the house of a disciple of Apollinarius you would see 
written up on the door or portico, a sentence to the effect 

1 Manei, t. iii. p. 640 : * Ab excommunications Flaviani oesaatum est, et 
sohiama Antiocheno ecclesin ad tempus oertum toleratum ftuV 

2 * Missig a latere suo aulicis com episcopis ' (Bonifacii I. Bp. xv.ad Rufum, 
Ac.). 

• * Que ejus saoerdotium roboraret ' (loc. cit.). 

* Nectarine' ordination needed to be purged of its irregularity as contra, 
veiling the Second Canon of Nicaea. 




—334 



THE BRETHREN CONFIRMED 



277 



that Christians should not adore a man who bore God within 
himself, but a God who bore human flesh. Both St. Basil 
and St. Athanasius exhibited a certain natural reluctance to 
condemn Apollinarius himself, though, it is needless to say, 
themselves absolutely free from any taint of his error. St. 
Damasus condemned him synodically in a synod (877) and 
deposed both him and his disciple Timothy, Bishop (perhaps 1 ) 
of Berytus, and the example of the Pope was followed at Alex- 
andria and Constantinople. St. Damasus had been asked to 
depose these bishops after he had done it. Accordingly he 
replied, 'Why, then, do you ask me again to depose Timothy 
seeing that he was deposed by the judgment of the Apostolic 
See, in presence of Peter, Bishop of Alexandria, together with 
his master, Apollinarius ? ' 2 

At this synod of 882 at Borne St. Jerome was deputed to 
draw up a formulary to be accepted by all suspected or con- 
victed of the heresy of Apollinarius. 

After this, various bishops met in the following year at 
Constantinople, and Damasus in a synod of the same year * 
confirmed all that had been done at Constantinople in 881, 
882, and 883 in regard to dogma. The canons were not sent 
to Borne, and therefore had no oecumenical authority. 

After the synod of 882 St. Damasus took St. Jerome for 
his secretary, and we know from the latter that the Pope was 
occupied, during the time that remained to him, in settling 
matters referred to him by synods from the East and West. 
He had been the centre of the Church's life now for nearly 
eighteen years, and during all that time he had been con- 
stantly employed in either meeting the attacks on his own 
person or those, more serious still, on the faith of the Church. 
He had been, as the Sixth General Council called him, the 
1 adamant of the faith.' As an instance of the way in which 
he was able to 1 confirm the brethren ' at times, we may re- 
member his action in regard to the saintly and orthodox 
successor of St. Athanasius at Alexandria. This bishop's 
name was Peter. He was driven out of his see by the 
Emperor Yalens, and one named Lucius was intruded. Peter 

1 The difficulties of settling who this Timothy was are considerable 
* Damas. Ep. 14. ■ Mansi, t. ill. p. 642. 




278 



THE SPLENDOUR OF 



a.©. 800 



betook himself to Borne, and in 877 he returned to Alexandria 
with letters from Damasus which, says the historian, * con- 
firmed the faith of the HomoousUm and the ordination of 
Peter. Whereupon the people of Alexandria took courage 
and drove out Lucius and brought back Peter in his place.' 1 
Eutherius, Bishop of Tyana, and Helladius, Bishop of Tarsus, 
two unimpeachable witnesses, probably referred to this amongst 
other instances when they said, in their remarkable letter to 
Pope Xystus, ' And often in former times when the tares of 
heresy were growing up out of Alexandria your Apostolic See 
sufficed during the whole of that time to convince of false- 
hood, repress impiety, and correct what needed correction, and 
to guard the world for the glory of Christ, as well under the 
thrice blessed Damasus as under several others/ 

It was, however, the chief glory of this Pope that he was 
the chosen instrument of the Holy Ghost to declare His 
Divine Majesty coequal with the Father and the Son, as part 
of that Catholic faith which had been enshrined in the 
Nicene Creed, but which needed explicit statement. This St. 
Damasus did in his ex cathedra pronouncement in the synods 
of 869 and 872, and his utterance gradually gathered into 
itself the entire Church, issuing in the assent of the great 
Eastern Synod in 881, which, by its acceptance at Borne, 
became one of the first four oecumenical councils, 1 so far as 
its dogmatic decision was concerned. No wonder that the 
heathen prefect at Borne, as he saw the central position of the 
see of Peter, the reverence paid to it in the midst of the 
troubles it met with through an Ursinus or an Isaac (the 
Jew), should say that he would become a Christian to-morrow 
if he could be made Bishop of Borne. He would probably 
have said the same of the bishopric of Milan, as he saw the 
heads of departments flock to the entertainments which St. 
Ambrose, himself the most mortified of men, occasionally gave 
in that city, and as he considered the influence of the great 
bishop on the Emperor Gratian. No wonder the heathen 
historian, Ammianus Marcellinus, felt the sting of jealousy as 

1 Socr. iv. 87. Sozomen acoounts for the fact that Valens did not avenge 
himself for this insult by his being just then distracted with troubles else- 
where (Soe. vi. 89). . * £*. eventually. 




—884 



ST. DAMASUS' REIGN. 



279 



he saw the state with which previous emperors had sur- 
rounded the heathen religion now transferred to the Chris- 
tian. He would not understand how a mortified man like 
Damasus viewed such matters, accepting the ritual of imperial 
homage whilst he knew that his real strength lay in the 
divine promise to the blessed Apostle Peter, in whose name, 
together with that of the holy Apostle Paul, he ruled the 
Church, and in whose chair he sat. 




Digitized by 



Google 



peeiod m. 

(THE FIFTH CENTURY.) 
400-452. 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Google 



CHAPTER XVII. 



THE CHUBOH OF NORTH AFRICA IN THE DAYS OF ST. AUGUSTINE. 



A recent writer, whose statements have been often traversed 
in this book, has said of us, in regard to the subject of this 
chapter, ' As honourable men, let them refrain from pretending 
that the Church of North Africa, in the time of St. Augustine, 
believed in the principles laid down by the Vatican Council. 
Such a pretence is an impertinence and an act of folly, which 
must alienate every person of good sense and Christian sim- 
plicity who is cognisant of it.' 1 The particular teaching of the 
said Council against which this writer's remarks are directed 
is given in the immediate context. It is ' the principle that, 
jure divino 9 every member of the Church, whether clerical or 
lay, has an inherent right to have " recourse to the Pope's 
judgment in all causes which appertain to the jurisdiction of 
the Church." The African Fathers absolutely deny that right.' 2 

It must be observed in passing, that it is notjme divino, 
according to the Vatican decrees, that everyone has the right 
of direct and immediate recourse to the Holy See. It belongs 
to ecclesiastical authority to regulate the channels of access to 
the supreme authority, which may differ at different times and 
in different countries. In a word, whilst the principle of appeal 
is open to all the world, the mode of procedure by which the 
appeal is set in motion is matter of ecclesiastical arrangement. 

Ever since the sixteenth century, or at any rate the 
seventeenth, the Church of North Africa in the days of St. 
Augustine has been quoted as an authority for separation from 

1 Primitive Saints, dc. p. 203 ; cf. also the Preface to the work by the 
Bishop of Lincoln, p. xxxi. * p. 202. 



§ I. — The Letters of St. Innocent 




284 



PELAG IANI8M 



a.d. 400 



Borne in this country. At the time of the final separation, when 
Elizabeth had an archbishop made without leave from Borne, 
and without connection with Borne of any kind, no theory had 
been struck out to justify the state of things in which men 
found themselves ; but as soon as they sought for the shelter 
of Church history the Church of North Africa was invoked in 
justification of the step taken. And when Archbishop Laud 
endeavoured to defend his position from history he laid great 
stress on the misunderstanding that arose between Borne and 
Africa in the beginning of the fifth century over the affair of 
Apiarius. Dr. Pusey followed in the same line and insisted 
that 4 England is not at this moment more independent of any 
authority of the Bishop of Borne than Africa was in the dayB 
of St. Augustine.' 1 

It is no exaggeration to say that if it can be shown that 
the Church of North Africa in the days of Augustine held that 
the Bishop of Borne was the supreme Governor of the Church 
under Christ, by His divine appointment, one of the great ob- 
stacles to reunion between ourselves and many of our fellow- 
countrymen will have been removed. It is this that I now 
proceed to show. 

I. The fifth century, in its first few years, saw the begin- 
ning of a heresy which struck at the roots of all Christian 
piety. It originated with a fellow-countryman of our own, a 
British monk named Pelagius, who denied that death was the 
penalty of sin — that sin had in any substantial way affected 
our nature, so as to weaken it and make it incapable of ful- 
filling the commands of God. Pelagius confused grace with 
the grant of free-will, and held that it was possible by the mere 
virtue of our free-will to keep the law. He denied that any 
interior strengthening of our nature was needed, admitting 
only the necessity of instruction, as by the doctrine and ex- 
ample of our Lord. He held that the assistance which helps 
us more easily to fulfil the divine commands is merited by the 
proper use of our free-will. 2 

1 Eirenicon, p. 66. 

* See in Migne's Patrol. Cursus a most exhaustive aooount of Pelagius' 
teaching in Gander's Seventh Dissertation on the Works of Marius Mercator, in 
which the above points are dealt with one by one. 




—462 



DRIVEN FROM AFRICA, 



285 



The great difficulty of dealing with this false doctrine lay 
not so much in the nature of the heresy as in the character 
of the heretics. Pelagius had no scruple about denying and 
asserting at random, professing perfect harmony with the 
teaching of the Church when pressed by authority, and pro- 
ceeding to teach its contradictory when absolved. 

His disciple, Ccelestius, was the first to come to the front ; 
and his action in Africa led to an expression of opinion on the 
value of a decision from Koine which ought to settle the ques- 
tion as to what the Church of North Africa held concerning 
the authority of the See of Peter. 

Ccelestius had found his way to Africa, and disseminated 
his opinions there. He was condemned by a synod at Carthage 
under Aurelius, a.d. 412. The synod wrote to Pope Innocent 
and described Ccelestius as 'struck with anathema and 
deprived of communion until he should openly anathematise 
the things objected against him.' Ccelestius appealed to Borne. 
The African Fathers took no exception to his appeal, which is 
mentioned quite naturally by Marius Mercator, a contemporary, 
and later on by Facundus the African writer. He left Car- 
thage and went, not, as it was supposed he would, to Borne to 
prosecute his appeal, but to Asia. His object seems to have 
been to get into the priesthood whilst he was yet finally un- 
condemned. He was ordained priest at Ephesus, and was 
therefore outside the patriarchal jurisdiction of Borne. 

Meanwhile Pelagius had gone to Jerusalem to disseminate 
his errors in Palestine ; there he found a sympathiser in the 
Bishop of Jerusalem, named John. But at a synod consisting 
mainly, if not altogether, of priests, a Spanish priest, named 
Orosius, whom St. Augustine had sent, as he says, to sit at 
the feet of Jerome at Bethlehem ' to learn the fear of the Lord,' 
explained what had happened at Carthage, how this Ccelestius 
had been condemned for false doctrine. Such a difficulty of 
language, however, arose, and Pelagius seemed so to evade all 
that Orosius accused him of teaching, that it was agreed to 
refer the matter to Borne, and John, the Bishop of Jerusalem, 1 
concurred, * confirming,' says Orosius, 4 our demand and con- 

1 This bishop seems to have bettered in Pelagius, without, however, having 
any sympathy with Pelagian ism. Cf . Natalia Alexander, H. E. vol. ix. pi 2. 




A 



286 



REFERRED TO ROME 



a.d. 400 



tention that the parties and the letters should be sent to the 
blessed Innocent, the Roman Pope, all agreeing to follow 
what he should decide, 1 but on the understanding that the 
heretic Pelagius should impose silence on himself meanwhile.' 

The Bishop of Jerusalem, however, fearing that Pelagius 
would be condemned at Borne, seems to have instigated the 
Bishop of Palestinian Caesarea, Eulogius, to summon a synod 
of the bishops of the province at Diospolis, in which Pelagius 
imposed upon his judges and was declared orthodox. Some 
of St. Jerome's monasteries were now burnt to the ground, 
owing to his opposition to this new heresy which Pelagius 
was now spreading about on the pretence that it had been 
sanctioned at the synod. 2 There were, however, two wandering 
bishops from Gaul, named Eros and Lazarus, who at once 
wrote to Africa and acquainted the bishops there of what had 
happened in Palestine. 

II. A large council of bishops was now held at Carthage to 
consider what step should be taken. It was contrary to the 
canons to condemn a man in his absence, and accordingly 
their plan was to give the sanction of the entire province to 
the Carthaginian decision of five years ago, and obtain for it 
the authoritative confirmation of the Apostolic See. I say of 
the Apostolic See, for this was the point of all their endeavour, 
not to obtain a condemnation from the see of the great city 
of Borne, but to obtain the authoritative sanction of ' the 
Apostolic ' See. ' We have considered/ so they write to Pope 
St. Innocent, 8 4 that we ought to acquaint your Holiness with 
this which was thus enacted, lord and brother, that the autho- 
rity of the Apostolic See may be applied to the statutes of 
our lowliness, for the sake of guarding the salvation of many, 
and also of correcting the perversity of some.' And after 
describing the teaching of Pelagius, they say (n. 8), 4 And we 
fear lest we should seem to act unbecomingly in bringing 
forward before you those very things which you proclaim 

1 * Universis, quid ipse decerneret, secuturis.' Orosii Apol. num. 4. 

* Jer. Ep. 24, apud Aug. 

* Innoc. Ep. xxvi. The letters which follow are to be found in most oollec- 
tionB of the Councils and in every complete edition of St Augustine's works. 
The following quotations are from the Benedictine edition, Paris, 1694. 




—462 



AS THE APOSTOLIC SEE. 



287 



with higher grace from the Apostolic See.' 1 And, again, ' If, 
therefore, in what is said to have been enacted by the bishops 
in the East, Pelagius shall seem to your Reverence to have 
been justly absolved, still the error itself and the impiety, 
which now has many champions scattered through divers 
regions, deserves the anathema of the Apostolic See 9 (n. 4). 

Almost immediately afterwards a synod of African bishops 
was also held at Milevis, at which St. Augustine was present, 
having come, it is supposed, from Carthage (where the letter 
just quoted was probably written by him) to assist in similar 
proceedings under Silvanus, the presiding bishop of the 
Numidian province. In the letter of this provincial council 
to Pope Innocent, the bishops say that they write, in imitation 
of their brethren at Carthage, 4 to the Apostolic See.' They 
speak of Coelestius, as well as Pelagius, being still ' in the 
Church 9 (n. 8), although the former had been anathematised 
and excommunicated in Africa. Only his appeal to Borne 
could justify them in thus speaking. The three saintly bishops, 
Augustine, Alypius, and Possidius, were present at this council, 
and the synodical letter to the Pope strikes the same key-note 
as that of the Carthaginian council. ' Because the Lord, by 
the special bounty of His grace, has placed you in the Apo- 
stolic See,' is their opening salutation. They excuse them- 
selves, after setting forth the heresy, for saying so much to 
one who is doubtless moved to act of his own accord, and 
then speak of Coelestius being still within the Church (n. 8). 
And they give their reason for wishing for the exercise of 
authority in this matter in words which ought to be written 
over every page of those treatises which endeavour to enlist 
the witness of ' the Church of North Africa in the days of 
St. Augustine ' against the supremacy of the Holy See. They 
say, ' We think . . . that those who hold such perverse and 
pernicious opinions will yield more readily to the authority of 
your Holiness, 2 derived from the authority of the Holy 
Scriptures/ But whether they will or not, there are ' others 
who, as your Beverence perceives, have to be cared for quickly 
and at once/ 

1 • Qua majore gratia do sede Apostolica prodieas.' 

1 So they speak of it as (i.) something beyond their own, and (ii.) as of divine 
institution. 




288 



THE LETTERS OF INNOCENT 



a.d. 400 



At the same time Aurelius, Augustine, Alypius, Evodius, 
and Possidius wrote besides a joint letter to the Pope to the 
same effect, asking for his rescripts. 

in. We have now to consider the two celebrated letters of 
St. Innocent in reply, and I shall quote them, not as showing 
what he claimed, but what the African bishops are found to 
have accepted without a murmur. These bishops, it will be 
seen, were either the tamest and most hypocritical of men, or 
they believed in Papal supremacy. 

To the synod at Carthage he writes : 1 « Preserving the 
ancient tradition, and mindful of the ecclesiastical discipline, 
you have in true method added strength to your religion, 2 not 
less by your present consultation [of us] than by your sen- 
tence having approved the principle of referring to our judg- 
ment, knowing what is due to the Apostolic See, since all of 
us who have been placed in this position desire to follow the 
Apostle himself, from whom the episcopate itself and all the 
authority of this office has proceeded. 3 Following him, we 
know how to condemn what is wrong and approve what de- 
serves approval. 4 The same is the case as to your judgment 
that the arrangements of the Fathers are not to be trodden 
under foot, in that they decreed, not by a human but by a 
divine sentence, that whatever is done from the separated and 
remote provinces they would not consider should be final 
unless it should come to the cognisance of the Apostolic See, 
so that whatever sentence shall have been justly delivered 
should be confirmed by the entire authority of this see, and 
that just as all waters should flow from their natal fount and 
the pure streams of the uncorrupt head flow through the 
diverse regions of the whole world, so other Churches should 
take from this see (inde mmerent) what to teach, whom to 
cleanse, who should be avoided, as stained with ineradicable 
filth, by the wave that is worthy of pure bodies.' He then 
gave his decision. 

This one rescript contains the teaching of the Vatican 

1 Aug. Ep. 181. 1 ' Vestrw religionis vigorem firmastis.' 

* * A quo ipse episcopates et tota auotoritas nominis hujus emersit' 
4 It is obvious that St. Innocent speaks of the infallibility of the Holy See. 
It is ' sequentes,' not 4 oum sequamur.' 




—462 



ON PAPAL INFALLIBILITY 



289 



Council entire. Before, however, considering its reception, 
listen to the sister letter to the Council of Milevis : 1 

'Diligently, therefore, and fittingly do you consult the 
arcana of the Apostolic office (a dignity, into which flows the 
care of all the Churches, besides those things which are without) 
on matters of anxiety, as to what opinion should be held, 
following the ancient rule, which you know as well as I do 
has been kept always by the whole world. . . . Why have 
you confirmed this, unless as knowing that replies are ever 
emanating from the Apostolic fountain through all provinces 
to those who petition it ? Especially as often as a matter of 
faith is being ventilated, I consider that all our brethren and 
fellow-bishops are in duty bound to refer only to Peter, that 
is, to the author of their own dignity and office, as your love 
has now referred, what may be for the common good of all 
Churches through the whole world. For the inventors of 
wrong must necessarily become more cautious, when they 
shall see that at the report of a double synod they are sepa- 
rated from ecclesiastical communion by the decrees of our 
sentence.' 

The Pope then proceeds to cut off Pelagius and Coelestius 
from the communion of the Church by Apostolic authority 
(' apostolici vigoris auctoritate ') until they repent ; and in his 
reply to the five bishops he says that his sentence will have 
its effect in whatever part of the world Pelagius may be, and 
that he has no reason to suppose that he has been absolved 
by any synod, because, if he had, letters would have at once 
been sent to Borne. If he has repented, it is not for us, says 
St. Innocent, to summon him to Borne, but for him to hasten 
here that he may be absolved. 

IV. Now, the important point for the argument of this 
book is, How did the African bishops, and, in particular, 
St. Augustine himself, receive this letter ? The whole of the 
Vatican teaching is contained in it. This simple fact is not 
without its bearing on much that has been written of late. 
The mere fact that that teaching was fully before the public 
consciousness of the Church in the year 416 has left St. Leo 
little or nothing to add in regard to the authority of the 



1 Aug. Ep. 182. 



u 




290 



WELCOMED IN AFRICA, 



ab. 400 



Apostolic See. But the important point is, Did the African 
bishops, did any African bishop, take exception to St. Inno- 
cent's definitions of the place occupied by Borne towards the 
rest of the Church as the See of Peter ? Did they throw out 
the remotest hint that, in accepting the net result of St. Inno- 
cent's letters, they excepted the passages about the authority 
with which it was done ? Not one. Yet the letter was much 
before the world. Later on, three African councils quoted 
one of the very passages in which St. Innocent so clearly 
defines the office of the See of Peter. This, it will be said, 
was too late to be a witness of the Early Church. But a very 
important writer, St. Prosper, a Gallic bishop, writing as a 
contemporary in defence of St. Augustine against Cassian, 
speaks of St. Innocent as ' most worthy of the See of Peter.' 
The expression is significant, for Prosper knew well what 
St. Innocent had said of that See. Also, 214 African bishops 
said : ' We determined that the judgment should stand which 
was issued by the venerable Bishop Innocent from the See of 
the most blessed Peter.' They are referring to these very 
letters of Innocent, and again, I say, the reference to the * See 
of Peter,' considering what those letters contain about it, is 
significant. I have been unable to find any single hint in 
any contemporary writer to the effect that St. Innocent was 
exaggerating the privileges of his see. Indeed, he hardly 
went beyond the declaration of the African bishops as to the 
Scriptural source of his authority. 1 

But what of St. Augustine himself ? St. Augustine says 
that Innocent, ' in reference to all things, wrote back to us in 
the same way in which it was lawful and the duty of the 
Apostolic See to write.' 2 

I do not know how it would be possible for St. Augustine 
to set his signature to the Vatican decrees by anticipation in 
plainer terms. Of these two great letters of Pope Innocent 
he says, in another place, challenging the Pelagian bishop, 
Julian, * Beply to him [i.e. Innocent], yea, rather to the Lord 
Himself, whose testimony that prelate used.' * Again, he 

1 The Liber Pontificals speaks of St. Innocent having drawn np a 4 con- 
stitutom 1 for the whole Churoh. 

• Ep. 186, n. 2. ' Lib. i. c. Julian, c 4. 




—452 



SPECIALLY BY ST. AUGUSTINE. 



291 



says that if anyone should come across Pelagians, he is no 
longer to exercise towards them a mistaken mercy ; he is not 
to conceal them, but to bring them before their bishop. ' For 
already two councils have been sent (or have sent) to the 
Apostolic See about that matter. Thence rescripts have come. 
The case is ended ; would that the error may be sometime 
ended too ! ' 1 St. Augustine knew that there were plenty 
who had already, when he wrote these words, resisted the 
decision of the Holy See, but nevertheless that decision was 
authoritative — ' The case is ended.' 

It has been customary to express the latter sentence in 
the short maxim, ' Rome has spoken ; the case is at an end ' 
— words which, it will be seen, are the exact equivalent of 
what St. Augustine here says. 

Hardly any decree exists in which the position of the 
Apostolic See has been more clearly defined than in that of 
St. Innocent ; and no decree was received in terms of more 
unqualified admiration by the Church of North Africa in the 
time of St. Augustine. 



Dr. Pusey 2 has made the relationship of Zosimus towards 
Pelagianism one of his test cases against the infallibility of the 
Holy See ; but in his handling of that Pope's history he has, 
in express terms, whether he knew it or not, contradicted St. 
Augustine, and in his own imaginary history of St. Zosimus 
he has founded his opposition on an incorrect description of 
Papal infallibility. It is the old story of the conflict between 
science and religion. The opposition is always found to be 
between imaginary facts (or gratuitous deductions) and 
Christian teaching, or between ascertained facts and a carica- 
ture of that teaching. In this case neither the facts exist nor 
is the representation of our teaching correct. 

I. In a.d. 417 Zosimus succeeded St. Innocent, and Cceles- 
tius at once hastened to Rome and resumed the appeal against 

1 Serm, cxxi. n. 10. 

* Sermon on the Rule of Faith, Pref. p. xiv, and Eirenicon pt iii. pp. 219-226. 

u 2 



§ II. — St Zosimus' Support of the Faith. 




292 ST. ZOSIMUS MISUNDERSTOOD a.d. 400 



the African sentence, of which he had given notice at the time, 
but which he had failed to prosecute. 1 

Zosimus admitted him to an audience. Coelestius had 
brought with him a letter of approbation from the Bishop of 
Jerusalem, and had avowed his desire to submit to the decrees 
of Innocent. 2 It is this that alters the whole case, and wrests 
the memory of this Pope from the accusation which Dr. Pusey 
so persistently brought against him. It is this that never 
appears in that writer's arraignment of the Pope. St. Innocent 
had expressly said 3 that if Coelestius and Pelagius should 
condemn their depraved teaching, they were to receive ' the 
usual medicine' — i.e. be received back into the Church. 
They did present documents in which they promised amend- 
ment. 4 Dr. Pusey says that the document which they presented 
was heretical, and that Zosimus failed in his guardianship of 
the faith, because he approved a Pelagian confession. 5 St. 
Augustine says be did no such thing. He insists upon the 
fact that, all through, St. Zosimus was entirely on the orthodox 
side. These are his words : — ' Zosimus never said, never 
wrote, that what they think about children is to be held — 
moreover, also, he bound over Coelestius again and again 
(crebra intei'locutione), when he was endeavouring to purge 
himself, to the necessity of consenting (consentiendum) to the 
above-mentioned letters of the Apostolic See ' (i.e. the letters 
of Innocent) ; and he argues that whilst Zosimus eventually 
condemned Coelestius and Pelagius, repeatedly and authorita- 
tively (' repetita auctoritate '), what took place meanwhile ' was 
the most kindly persuasion [for the purpose] of correction, not 
the most hateful approval of depravity.' 6 And elsewhere he 
insists that Zosimus dealt with Coelestius on the understanding 
' that he should condemn what had been objected against him 
by the deacon Paulinus [i.e. at Carthage], and give his assent 
to the letters which had emanated from his own predecessor,' 7 
i.e. St. Innocent. St. Augustine is meeting the cavils of the 
Pelagians, who wished to make out that the Pope, St. Zosimus, 

1 Paolini Libdl. ad Zosim. apud Baron, ad ann. 418. 

* Zosim. Ep. i. ad Africanos. • Innocentii Ep. xxx. 

4 Marias Mercator, i. 4. * Sermon on the Rule of Faith, Pref. p. xiv. 

• Aug. lib. ii. ad Bonif. cap. 3. 7 Cf. Lib. de Pecc. Orig., cap. 6 and 7. 




—462 



BY DR. PUSEY AND OTHERS. 



293 



had favoured their cause ; and by an appeal to the actual 
history of the case, he overthrows their contention, and in 
doing this he answers Dr. Pusey by anticipation. 

II. Moreover, St. Zosimus did not absolve these heretics 
there and then, but wrote to Africa for any ' instruments ' of 
information, and said that if no one offered within two months 
to present a further case against Coelestius and Pelagius, he 
should consider all doubt removed. 1 He had received their 
letter of entreaty, he says, before he gave judgment. 8 The 
African Fathers had met and represented to the Pope that 
his absolving these heretics would cause great confusion. They 
said that they decided that the decision of St. Innocent should 
hold good until Pelagius should confess that the doctrine he 
had taught was false. 8 

Zosimus was really acting with the caution of a judge : 
and as a judge he was in the right. It is the office of a judge 
to give sentence according to the evidence produced, and 
Zosimus was, from a formal point of view, right in his decision 
to hear Coelestius and Pelagius. They professed amendment, 
and until evidence of their insincerity was forthcoming, Zosi- 
mus was in duty bound to admit them to a hearing. Dr. 
Pusey is mistaken in nearly every assertion that he makes on 
this subject. He says that Zosimus 4 formally acquitted ' 
Coelestius. He only promised to do so if nothing from Africa 
turned up to the contrary, but meanwhile he discovered his 
insincerity. Dr. Pusey also says that Coelestius 'presented 
to Zosimus an heretical confession of faith.' Now St. Augus- 
tine expressly says that this document was not heretical. He 
calls it * Catholic* Whence this tremendous difference between 
St. Augustine and Dr. Pusey ? 

III. St. Augustine shall explain. He says that Coelestius 
and Pelagius promised submission and correction, if in any- 
thing they were judged to be wrong. This, according to our 
saint, stamped the document as Catholic. There were errors 
contained in it, it is true ; but St. Zosimus himself says to 
the Africans that they have misunderstood the text of his 
letters, as a whole, 'as though we had given credence to 
Coelestius in all things, and without discussing his words, had 

1 Ep. i. * Ep. iif. • Prosper, Lib. c. Coll. cap. v. n. 8. 




294 



HIS CARE ABOUT CCELESTIUS. 



A.D. 400 



assented, so to speak, to every syllable.' 1 It was the submis- 
sion promised to the Apostolic See, which made Zosimus 
accept them as worthy of a hearing, and it was this that, 
St. Augustine expressly says, made the document ' Catholic in 
its meaning.' * 

Pelagius said of his confession of faith : ' In which, if any- 
thing has been laid down unskilfully or incautiously, we desire 
to be corrected by you, who hold both the faith and the See of 
Peter ; but if this our confession is approved by the judgment 
of your apostolate, then, whoever shall affix a stain on my 
character will prove himself to be unlearned, or ill-willed, or 
even not a Catholic, and not me to be a heretic.' 

This was the addition which in Si. Augustine's judgment 
made the document strictly Catholic in tone. 

Ccelestius likewise said, 1 We offer them ' (i.e. their teach- 
ings) ' to be approved by your apostolic judgment [lit. the 
judgment of your apostolate], so that if perchance any error 
of ignorance has crept in upon us, as being men, it may be 
corrected by your sentence.' 

Consequently, Marius Mercator, whose authority is of great 
moment, says that Ccelestius ' by frequent answers 9 gave hopes 
that he condemned the heads of teaching for which he had 
been condemned at Carthage, and that this was the reason 
why ' he was thought worthy of some kindness by that holy 
bishop' (Zosimus), for be 'was commanded with special 
urgency ' to renounce what had there been objected against 



I have said that Zosimus was acting in the spirit of a real 
judge, and this his letter to the Africans shows. They had 
really acted without the proper procedure. Although (as it 
proved) substantially right, they were formally wrong. They 
had acted on the accusation of two deposed bishops, Eros and 
Lazarus, whose motives were not beyond question, and who, 

1 Zos. Ep. iii. 

» He says (Ep. clvii. ad Opt.) that ' the Catholic faith ' is so clear in Zosimus' 
letter * that it is not lawful for Christians to doubt concerning it.' And thai it 
was Catholic « because it is the part of a Catholic mind ' to do as Ccelestius then 
pretended to do, viz. consent to the letters of Pope Innocent (c. du. Ep. Pelag. 
lib. ii. c. 5). 

* Common, sup. nomine Ccelestii, cap. i. § 4. 



him. 8 




—452 



HIS ENCYCLICAL AND 



295 



as degraded from their office, had no longer the right of accu- 
sation. 1 Zosimus, who had the care of all the Churches, 
pointed out the evils that would ensue if such wandering stormy 
petrels as Eros and Lazarus were allowed to enter upon the 
role of accusers of others. And in their previous trial the 
Africans had failed in duty towards Coelestius, who had given 
notice of appeal to Rome ; for, although they appear to have 
respected the appeal, they took no care to have it properly 
conducted. It must be remembered also that Zosimus did 
not rehandle the dogmatic question. It was merely with 
the sincerity of Coelestius and Pelagius that he dealt, and in 
this he was deceived. But this has nothing to do with his 
infallibility. Rome has never taught, Rome does not teach 
to-day, that the occupant of the Holy See cannot be deceived, 
but only that when he is led to determine a matter of faith or 
of the moral law as of obligation on the whole Church, he is 
secure of divine assistance. 

The whole case, therefore, of Zosimus is outside the region 
of infallibility, as that infallibility is defined in the Vatican 
decree. As Facundus, the African writer, says, in reference 
to the whole matter, ' Simplicity, through not penetrating 
the wiliness of the wicked, ought not to be reckoned a crime ; ' 
and, as St. Augustine says, Pelagius could not deceive the 
Church of Rome beyond a certain point. Zosimus discovered 
that Coelestius was not in earnest, summoned him to appear, 
and on his non-appearance excommunicated and anathe- 
matised him. 

IV. But he did more than that. He drew up an ency- 
clical on the matter of faith, which consisted of an enlarged 
form of the decree of Innocent, accepted by the African 
Church ; and by the advice of St. Augustine, the subscription 
to this was made obligatory on all bishops, and on the laity 
whenever suspected of heretical leanings. 2 The emperor 
gave the aid of his civil authority, and St. Augustine of his 

1 This, at any rate, was the view of Zosimus. TiUemont has done his best 
to defend them. But see Garnier's notes to Marius Mercator for an answer 
(Migne's edition). 

* In writing to the Africans the emperor spoke of his rescript as agreeing 
with their decision, which was true. But it was also true that in a higher sense 
he followed the judgment of Zosimus. Cf. Possidius, Vita S. Aug. cap. xviii. 




296 



EX CATHEDRA TEACHING. 



a j>. 400 



pen, which for some years he devoted to this subject, for 
the settlement of which he claimed the decree of St. Innocent 
and the encyclical of St. Zosimus embodying and enforcing 
that decree. 

St. Zosimus, in writing to the Africans concerning his 
decision to allow Ccelestius a hearing, said : ' Although the 
tradition of the Fathers has attributed so great authority to 
the Apostolic See, that no one would venture to dispute con- 
cerning its judgment, and has always guarded the same by 
canons and regulations, and the current discipline of the 
Church up to this time, by its laws, pays due reverence to the 
name of Peter, from whom she traces her descent (for cano- 
nical antiquity by the judgments of all willed that such power 
should accrue to this Apostle, derived also from the very 
promise of Christ our God, that he could loose what was 
bound and bind what was loosed, an equal condition of power 
was given to those who obtained the inheritance of the see 
with his approval, for he has the care as well of all the 
Churches as in a special manner of this his own see. . . . 
Since, then, Peter is the bead of such authority, and he has 
confirmed the subsequent desires of all our ancestors, that 
the Roman Church should be sustained by human as well as 
divine laws . . .), nevertheless, though such is our authority, 
that no one can withdraw himself from our judgment, we 
have done nothing which we have not of our own accord 
brought to your knowledge by our letters,' &c. 

I produce this passage by way of showing the kind of 
teaching which Africa received from Home, and which nowhere 
in St. Augustine's voluminous writings finds any contradic- 
tion : with which, on the contrary, his teaching, as seen above, 
fully harmonises. 

We look in vain in the history of the Church of North 
Africa at this time for any disclaimer, any suggestion, that 
Rome was not the See of the Apostle Peter, and, as such, the 
inheritor of peculiar powers of jurisdiction. She assumed 
this position as in duty bound ; she instinctively quoted the 
divine authority by which she acted, and Africa on the whole 
listened, applauded, co-operated, and obeyed. Such is the 
only conclusion that can be drawn from the facts quoted 




—452 



THE CASE OF APIARIUS 



297 



above. So dependent was Africa on Rome, that when the 
Donatists boasted that some Easterns had written letters of 
sympathy, St. Augustine argued that these Easterns must 
have been Arians, because ' never would an Eastern Catholic 
[Church] write to the Bishop of Carthage, passing over the 
Bishop of Rome ' 1 — in other words, all ecclesiastical communi- 
cation would come from the East through Rome. 2 And in 
this great contest with Pelagianism, Prosper, in his historical 
defence of St. Augustine against Cassian, writes, with the 
knowledge of a contemporary, that ' the Pope Zosimus of 
blessed memory added the strength of his own judgment to 
the decrees of the African Councils, and armed the right hands 
of all the prelates with the sword of Peter to the destruction 
of the impious.' 

§ III. — Apiaritis, or the Dispute as to a particular Exercise of 
Papal Juiisdiction and the best Mode of Procedure in regard 
to the inferior Clergy. 

I. But a question arose as to the best method of exercising 
this jurisdiction of the See of Peter over the Church of North 
Africa. The course of appeal was in the case of bishops, first, 
to the province, next to a general synod, and then to Rome. 
But in regard to priests and deacons, the Africans drew up 
a canon in a.d. 418 to the effect that these ' inferior ' clergy 
could appeal first to bishops in the neighbourhood then to 
the primate of a province, or to a national synod, but no 
further. 3 Pope Zosimus had thought fit to disregard the 
mode of procedure afterwards laid down in this their canon, 
by admitting a priest named Apiarius to communion. He 
afterwards commissioned his legate, Faustinus, to impress 
upon the Africans that his procedure was not novel, but that 
its principle had been included in the Nicene canons. The 

1 Con. Cre&conium, lib. iii. cap. 34, § 38. 

3 The communication about the Nicene canons was by agreement with 
Borne. 

* Just as in England there is no legal appeal in a criminal case from the 
verdict of a British jury ; which is an instance of the truth that the right of 
access to the supreme authority is not an essential consequence of its supremacy. 
The authority, still supreme, may be exercised by an inferior court. It is, in a 
word, all a matter of arrangement. 




298 



A DISPUTE AS TO THE MODE 



a.c. 400 



Africans had not this canon in their own copies ; they there- 
fore asked leave to communicate with the East, and see if 
their copies tallied with those at Borne, and, indeed, they 
insisted that they ought to be allowed thus to assure them- 
selves as to the gap in their own copies. Meanwhile, 
St. Augustine proposed that they should act in obedience to 
the regulations which Zosimus had included amongst the 
canons of Nicaea. They did not say that they would not obey, 
even if their own copies of the canons were found to be 
correct. They said they would consider the question further. 

Now, without entering here into the question whether the 
canons of general councils were above the Pope or not, it is 
certain that the Popes regarded themselves as the custodians 
of these councils, and as bound in conscience to govern 
according to their requirements. It was, therefore, quite 
consistent with respect for the Pope's supremacy to plead 
that he was in this instance departing from the canonical 
regulations. A Catholic bishop now might do the same, if a 
case arose ; and it may be added, that since the Church has 
a human side, a little warmth is wont to arise over such 
contentions when they are of great interest to the parties 
engaged. 

It was, therefore, no failure in obedience, or respect, on 
the part of the African Fathers, to say what they did on this 
occasion. The failure would have been in resisting the Papal 
decision if, after common consultation, it did not harmonise 
with their own judgment. To this pass, however, matters 
never came. History deserts us just when we should have 
wished her to speak ; we only know that the Church in North 
Africa eventually settled down to the arrangement which 
Zosimus called that of a Nicene canon. 

II. But this is to anticipate. The copies of the Nicene canons 
from the East arrived in 419, 1 and we hear nothing more of 

1 There was no sort of infallibility about the version of the canon that 
Atticos sent from Constantinople ; nor is it at all certain that the Alexandrians 
possessed the canons intact. Neither of them ever acted as though the African 
contention were vital. And, indeed, the Africans put in a saving clause as to 
clinging to their own custom, viz. * if they should be strictly observed by you in 
Italy.' They imply that they would be guided by Italian custom. Antiooh did 
not send her canons. Cf. note at the end of Appendix II., p. 474. 




—452 



OF EXERCISING JURISDICTION. 



299 



the matter until four years afterwards, when the same 
scandalous priest came on to the scene, again appealed to 
Borne, and was again unhappily absolved. This was under 
Celestine. Meanwhile the Papal legate had succeeded in 
making himself obnoxious to the Africans, and they seem to 
have made an effort to do away with legates a latere for ever. 
They accordingly wrote a letter in which they entreated St. 
Celestine to send no more legates. They also 'earnestly 
entreat * 1 him to allow matters to be terminated (they are 
alluding to the case of the priest Apiarius, not to the case 
of bishops) where they arose. They cannot suppose that 
Almighty God would give wisdom to one man (in allusion to 
Faustinus, who had 1 opposed the whole assembly of bishops ') 
over against innumerable bishops ; and to drag cases all the 
way to Rome involved the impossibility of having the proper 
array of witnesses, and as for legates a latere, no canon 
provides for such. 

The letter in which these statements occur differs in tone 
from any other communication from the African Church : it is 
evidently written with a tinge of bitterness ; but one or two 
points are worthy of special notice. First, they do not ask 
St. Celestine not in any case to admit persons excommuni- 
cated at a distance {e.g. in Africa) to communion, nor do they 
ask him under no circumstances to reverse the judgments of 
the Africans ; they only ask him not to do this 1 too readily, 
hastily, and unduly.' They do not oppose the principle of 
Papal jurisdiction, but urge, as they had every right to do, 
great care in its exercise. Secondly, they give a reason why 
the presence of a legate a latere is to be deprecated. It is 
not that he represents a false principle of jurisdiction, but that 
it leads to pride. Faustinus had evidently been lording it over 
Africa. They had borne with him so far, for it was not 
contrary to their faith to be ruled from Rome, but they trust 
St. Celestine— nay, they are sure they can rely on him — not to 
send any more, ' lest we should seem to introduce the smoky 
pride of the world.' These ' executors ' of the Papal mandates 
were apt, as we learn from St. Augustine, to be accompanied 



* Impendio deprecamar.' 




300 



NO QUESTION AS TO PAPAL 



a.d. 400 



with great military escorts, and this did not, so they considered, 
tend to peace. It did not impress the heathen. It was to be 
deprecated, ' lest we ' (i.e. we Christians here in Africa) ' should 
seem to introduce the pride of the world.' Faustinus was not 
the inheritor of the Papal charisma, and did not understand 
matters as well as the African bishops themselves. So that 
they say one could only defend his position on the supposition 
that God could inspire one man with wisdom to the deprecia- 
tion of innumerable bishops. 

Much capital has been made out of this letter by one or 
two slight; perversions of its terms. It has been assumed, for 
instance, that the 'one man 9 to whom the Africans here 
objected meant the Pope himself. But this is impossible. 
Not only is it the fact that Faustinus, as the bishops said, 
' opposed the whole assembly,' and so, obviously, supplied the 
subject of their remark, but the Africans knew well that in all 
such cases the Pope never did act alone, he received appeals 
in Synod ; so that the remark about the ( one man ' being 
unequal to a number of bishops cannot apply to his Holiness. 
Again, a great many writers in defence of their theory have 
translated the words ' test we should seem to introduce the 
pride of the world,' as though, again, the bishops were speak- 
ing of the Pope instead of themselves as a body in Africa. 
Archbishop Laud deliberately turns the ' we * into 1 he.' Canon 
Bright understands it of the Pope, and likewise Mr. Puller— a 
most unreasonable supposition. 

III. Once more, it is constantly argued that the Africans, 
instead of merely doing their best by earnest entreaty (' im- 
pendio deprecamur ') to secure a particular mode of procedure, 
or to limit it to the case of bishops, were resisting the doctrine 
of Papal jurisdiction in itself. But the whole of the contem- 
porary history forbids such a supposition. The ideal of Church 
government was, to the African mind, that priests should 
never be allowed to appeal beyond Africa, and that the cases 
of bishops should be managed by Papal commissions con- 
sisting of African bishops. Borne did not consent to bind 
herself to the former arrangement, but she had employed the 
latter. St. Augustine's visit to Mauritania — in the very 
year of the first council, in which the bishops promised 




—452 



JURISDICTION IN ITSELF. 



301 



to act in obedience to Zosimus' interpretation of the Nicene 
canons — is a case in point. The Pope sent St. Augustine, as 
his commissioner, with some others, to settle the affairs of 
these Mauritanian Bishops on the spot. St. Augustine was 
strictly the Pope's legate for the occasion. He tells us 
himself that he was ' enjoined by the venerable Pope Zosimus, 
Bishop of the Apostolic See ; ' and his friend St. Possidius, 
himself an African bishop, says in his Life of St. Augustine 
that he (Augustine) went to Mauritania, 1 compelled by the 
letters of the Apostolic See, for the termination of other 
necessities of the Church/ i.e. not merely for a conference 
with the Donatist bishop Emeritus. St. Augustine gives a 
glimpse of the cases he had to settle in another passage. They 
were questions of precedency between bishops. Thus the 
ideal of Church government in the eyes of the North African 
Church was not that there should be no appeal to Borne in 
the case of bishops — not that they should act independently 
of Borne, but that the authority of the Apostolic See should be 
exercised through the medium of an episcopal commission, con- 
sisting of African bishops, and not by a legate sent from 
Borne itself. It was a question of procedure, not of the right 
of jurisdiction itself. 

If this letter on which so much has been built is genuine, 
there is another argument to be derived from it to show that 
they could not have meant to withdraw their dependence on 
the Apostolic See. One of the signatories was the celebrated 
Anthony, who himself just about the same time prosecuted 
an appeal to Borne against St. Augustine. The Primate of 
Numidia favoured the appeal, and St. Augustine acted on the 
supposition of an appeal being a legitimate course of action. 
The only answer that has ever been given to this is that which 
was suggested in the ' Defensio Cleri Gallicani,' and which, 
corrected of its tremendous blunder, appears in Mr. Puller's 
'Primitive Saints and the See of Borne.' The 'Defensio' (I 
forbear to call it Bossuet's, as it is uncertain how far it 
is his handiwork in a passage of much bitterness against 

1 Mr. Poller here, as always, calls it Bossuet's, and indulges in some sarcasm 
against Lupus, who, however, turns out to be accurate, whilst 4 Bossuet * commits 
a huge blunder. I suspect that Bossuet's handiwork is mainly visible in such 
passages as that on Hormisdas' Formulary. 




302 



MR. PULLER'S ASSUMPTION. 



a.d. 400 



Christianas Lupus, the eminent canonist, says that if Lupus 
had read the letter attentively he would have discovered 4 that 
it was written in the beginning of Celestine's reign [which is 
true], before the replies had arrived from the East about the 
Nicene canons, at which time we have seen that appeals were 
permitted by the Africans,' &c. 

Now we know for certain that the answer about the Nicene 
canons arrived in the end of the year 419. Mr. Puller him- 
self admits this. We know also that St. Celestine did not 
begin his reign until 422. Thus we are told by Bossuet (if 
it be his writing) that a letter written in 422 or 423, was 
prior in point of time to some replies given in 419 ! 

Mr. Puller adopts another argument, or rather, the same 
argument with the omission of this blunder. He says that 
the interval during which the African Fathers promised to 
accept appeals to Borne lasted for five years. There is not a 
word in the records to justify this assertion. It is a pure 
assumption, and not only does it rely on no foundation of 
fact, but it apparently contradicts the record. The African 
Fathers promised to obey St. Zosimus' interpretation of the 
Nicene arrangements 'for a short time . . . until we had 
investigated the statutes of the Nicene Council.' The statutes 
of the council had arrived in 419. Does Mr. Puller suppose 
that the African Fathers were still poring over those statutes 
some four years afterwards ? Yet he says that during that 
interval, which he describes as * five or, as some say, seven 
years,' ' appeals to Borne from Africa in the case of bishops 
in accordance with the agreement ' were permitted, the agree- 
ment being that they should be permitted until they had 
investigated the Nicene statutes, which had arrived four years 
since, during which interval they had held council after 
council, and yet had never, so far as any records go, mentioned 
the subject ! All is plain enough if we suppose that they had 
learnt something further from Borne, i.e. either that the 
genuine copy of the Nicene Council was that which was pre- 
served at Borne, or that the Sardican canons were a due 
appendix to the Nicene. 

But, on the theory against which I am contending, we 
have to suppose that Bishop Anthony, strongly disapproving 




—462 



TILE LETTER PROBABLY 



303 



of appeals, yet himself prosecuted an appeal to Borne and 
induced the Primate of Numidia to back his appeal, and that 
St. Augustine followed the matter to Rome (all of which is 
admitted history) ; and all this was done on the ground that 
they were living in an interval in which appeals were per- 
mitted, but which was shortly to be closed as contrary to the 
admitted and vital principles of Church government ! We 
have also to suppose that a month or so after the first council 
had decided upon this interval St. Augustine went off to 
Mauritania to act as Papal legate, although (on the same 
theory) the Pope had no jurisdiction in that country. The 
African bishops behaved, on this theory, much as schoolboys 
who have a little leave to do a number of things they wanted 
to do, and take full advantage of the leave ; whereas all is 
plain and natural on the supposition that the African bishops 
believed, as St. Augustine did, that when Rome had spoken 
the case was at an end, and not till then, in the case of 
bishops. On the further matter, as to priests, they wished 
for an arrangement which would have modified the exercise 
of the Pope's jurisdiction, without attacking the root principle 
of that jurisdiction. 

IV. But, in point of fact, the gravest suspicion rests on this 
letter, which has been made to do such service against the 
principle of appeals. Had such a document been handed to 
St. Augustine for inspection he must have disclaimed it as no 
Catholic document. In his conference with the Donatists he 
objected to the production of documents without dates. 1 The 
Donatists replied that many councils had no date. St. Au- 
gustine to this replied that such might be the case with schis- 
matical councils, but not with Catholic documents. He 
quoted the prophets in his behalf, who say in whose reign they 
prophesied. He more than once enunciated this vital prin- 
ciple, that you have no right to bring a document into court, 
purporting to be that of a Catholic council, unless it has the 
name of the consul and the day. 

This letter, on which Dr. Pusey so much relied, has no 
date. 

1 Cf. Brevictdus Collationis cum Donalistis, 8ii diei, cap. xv. 27 : 1 O r 
liooram concilia oonsules et dies semper habuisae.' 



^tized by G00gle 



304 



A DONATIST FORGERY. 



a.d. 400-452 



Further, it comes before us as emanating from a universal 
synod of Africa — the peer of the great meeting of 419. 1 Yet 
we have no record of this synod. This would not be fatal if 
we had the date, but there is no date. 

Further, when we examine the list of signatories we dis- 
cover that their number is fifteen. It adds that there were 
others — viz. those whom they represented, as would be natural, 
but it only gives fifteen names. Now fifteen was the exact 
number of legates fixed upon shortly before to represent a 
universal synod. But the president was never counted in, 
so that though fifteen is the right number, there ought to be at 
least one other name mentioned to make the account correct. 

But when we examine the list of signatories we find that 
it differs altogether from that of the fifteen who were appointed. 
Why is this ? The « Defensio CI. Gall.' (Bossuet) says that 
other legates had been appointed. It is curious that we have 
no record of this, whilst the names were so carefully recorded, 
with the provinces, in the unquestioned list issued by the un- 
questioned universal synod. 

But whose names are wanting? Why, instead of St. 
Augustine, St. Alypius, and Bestitutus, the three bishops who 
had hitherto represented Numidia, we find one bishop of that 
province, and that is Anthony, the name of the scandalous 
bishop who had appealed to Borne against St. Augustine. 
This was the man who is supposed to have represented Numidia 
instead of those three saints, and to have signed the heated 
letter against appeals ! 

I submit that this is an insufficient foundation on which 
to rest the position that the Church of North Africa repudiated 
the supreme jurisdiction of that see which it called in every 
letter, I had almost said in every other sentence of some 
letters, 'the Apostolic See.' She accepted St. Innocent's 
letters with all their Vatican teaching, whilst her subsequent 
writers never allude to this discussion as involving any such 
repudiation. 2 

1 In my letter to the Bishop of Lincoln (1893) there is a misprint on this 
subject. The 1 not ' should be erased on p. 38 as the argument requires. 

2 There is a forged letter whioh does, but the forgery has been exposed with 
ample evidence. See also note at the end of Appendix IL 




CHAPTER XVIII. 



THE COUNCIL OF BPHE8U8. 



I. A pbculiab importance attaches to the Council of 
Ephesus, from an historical point of view, from the fact that it is 
the first of the (Ecumenical Councils of which we have anything 
like a full and unquestioned narrative. Accordingly, I shall 
proceed to test the theory of independent national Churches 
by the history of this council. 

It must be remembered that that theory regards the most 
complete severance from the Apostolic See as compatible with 
membership in the One, Holy, Catholic and Apostolic Church ; 
and that it appeals especially to the Church of those four 
General Councils which St. Gregory compared to the four 
Holy Gospels. I propose, therefore, to show, from a review 
of the council, that nothing but the most complete misinter- 
pretation of the Acts of this council could enable anyone to 
consider the above theory as in harmony with the teaching of 
the early Christian Church. 

The council was concerned with the question of the union 
of the two natures in the One Divine Person of our Redeemer. 
Was it a substantial or an accidental union? The whole 
question of the world's salvation hung upon the answer. Both 
St. Celestine, the Pope, and St. Cyril of Alexandria emphasise 
this fact. St. Celestine, in his letter to Nestorius, says, that 
'we complain that those words have been removed [i.e. by 
Nestorius] which promise us the hope of all life and salvation.' 
St. Cyril again and again strikes the same note. Dr. Salmon 
would have done well to have remembered this in his criti- 
cisms 1 on this great champion of the faith. 



1 InfaUibUUy of the Church, p. 312. 



X 




306 



NESTORIUS' FALSE TEACHING. a-d. 400 



Up to the time of the Council of Ephesus expressions 1 had 
been used concerning the union of the two natures in Christ 
which were meant in an orthodox sense, but which were 
liable to misinterpretation. St. Ignatius had spoken of 
Christ as 'bearing flesh;' Tertullian had described Him 
as 'clothed with flesh;' and the early Fathers had often 
used the word 'mixture* (tcpaais) of the union of the two 
natures. 

But a term had been in use which, if rightly understood, 
safeguarded the truth of the Swats of the two natures. I 
mean, of course, the term &sot6ko9, or Mother of God, as 
applied to our Blessed Lady. The term had not been as tho- 
roughly sifted, and authoritatively explained by the Church, 
as it was destined to be, owing to the heresy of Nestorius ; 
but, as the Patriarch of Antioch bade Nestorius reflect, it had 
been in frequent use. 

II. Nestorius had entered upon his career as archbishop 
with the boast that if the emperor would give him the earth 
cleared of heretics, he would give him heaven in exchange, 
and that if His Imperial Majesty would assist him in putting 
heretics to rout, he would assist him to do the same with his 
Persian foes. He was inexcusably cruel to his heterodox sub- 
jects, but he soon himself plunged into a heresy which cut at 
the root of the Christian faith — attributing to our Divine Lord 
a human personality, and thereby denying the substantial 
union between the two natures. His writings found their 
way into Egypt, which was in the patriarchate of Alexandria, 
presided over at that time by the great St. Cyril. St. Cyril 
was consequently bound to take notice of the danger, and a 
correspondence ensued between him and Nestorius. St. Cyril 
at length appealed to the Pope. He held off from this final 
step as long as he could, from the same feeling as St. Celestine 
himself expressed when he said that he could have wished 
never to have seen the letters of Nestorius, ' lest I should be 
compelled to pass judgment on so serious a matter.' 

III. St. Celestine was a man full of zeal for the faith and 
of great piety, judging from his letters. Dr. Wordsworth 
appeals to him as the best judge of Cyril's character and 



Cf. Cath. Diet. 1 Council of Ephesug. 1 




—462 



ST. CYRIL INTERVENES. 



307 



conduct, although he mistakes his share in the affair of Nes- 
torius. He says : * Perhaps there could not have been a more 
impartial judge of the parties in the struggle than the Bishop 
of Borne. Celestine was a calm spectator of the controversy, 
and in a review of it it may be well to enumerate his letters 
as indicative of his bearing with regard to it, and also as a 
summary of its history.' 1 

We shall presently see that St. Celestine was by no means 
a mere * spectator of the controversy,' and that his letters by 
no means bear out Dr. Wordsworth's general review of the 
Council. But that writer shows a true instinct in taking the 
Pope's estimate of St. Cyril, in preference to that of the 
latter's enemies, whom Dr. Salmon follows, 2 for St. Celes- 
tine's estimate is that of all after time. ' The bishop of 
Borne,' says Dr. Wordsworth, ' did not suppose Cyril to 
have been actuated by any unworthy motives in this con- 
troversy.' In this matter Dr. Pusey is at one with Dr. Words- 
worth. 3 

St. Celestine, on being appealed to by St. Cyril, at once 
convoked a synod, as was customary with the bishops of 
Borne, and gave St. Cyril a full and emphatic answer. He 
authorised him to act for him judicially. So far St. Cyril's 
action towards Nestorius had been an office of charity, not an 
act of jurisdiction. He did not think that he would do well 
even to excommunicate him from his own Church without 
consulting Celestine, although he says he might legitimately 
have done that much. When he wrote to the Egyptian monks 
he was writing to people within his own jurisdiction, but 
he had now laid the matter before one who could deal with 
cases that concerned the whole Church, and with the question 
of deposition as well as excommunication. 4 The correspond- 
ence that passed between Alexandria and Borne on this occa- 
sion is, however, so important that, at the cost of repetition, 
I will give a summary of the two letters. 5 

IV. St. Cyril begins with giving his reason for breaking the 
silence which he had kept as long as he dared. The ancient 

1 Wordsworth's Church History, vol. iv. pp. 232-3. 

« Loc. cit. • Pref. to St. Cyril's Works. Lib. of the Fathers. 

4 Cf. Antifebronius vindicates, pt. i. p. 506. * Mansi, t. iv. p. 1011, seq. 



x 2 




308 



WRITES IN DUTY TO THE POPE, 



a.d. 400 



customs of the Churches (he says) persuade us to communi- 
cate such matters to your Holiness; I, therefore, write of 
necessity. Nestorius (he says) from the commencement of 
his episcopate has been disseminating amongst his own 
people, and the strangers who flock to Constantinople from 
all quarters, absurd ideas, contrary to the faith. He has sent 
Nestorius' homilies to Celestine. It was in his mind to tell 
Nestorius at once that he could no longer hold communion 
with him ; but he thought it better to hold out to him a help- 
ing hand first and exhort him by letters. Nestorius, however, 
only tried in every way to circumvent him. At last a bishop, 
named Dorotheus, exclaimed in Nestorius* presence, 1 If any 
one shall call Mary the mother of God, let him be anathema. 9 
A crisis was reached by this expression ; a great disturbance 
arose amongst the people of Constantinople. With few ex- 
ceptions they refrained from communion — nearly all the monas- 
teries and great part of the senate — for fear of receiving 
harm to their faith. He had found, moreover, that Nestorius* 
writings had been introduced into Egypt, and in consequence 
had written an encyclical to the Egyptian monasteries to con- 
firm them in the faith. Copies of this finding their way to 
Constantinople, Nestorius had resented Cyril's action. He 
accused Cyril of having read the Fathers wrongly. Cyril 
says he wrote direct to Nestorius, with a compendious expo- 
sition of the faith, exhorting him to conform to this. All the 
bishops, adds Cyril, are with me, especially those of Mace- 
donia. Nestorius, however, considered that he alone under- 
stood the Scriptures. While all orthodox bishops and saints 
confess Christ to be God, and the Virgin to be the mother of 
God, %6otokos 9 he alone who denies this is supposed, forsooth, 
to be in the right. The people of Constantinople now began, 
says St. Cyril, to look for aid outside their province. St. Cyril 
felt that a 1 dispensation was entrusted to him,' and that he 
should have to answer on the day of judgment for silence in 
this matter. He does not, however, feel that he can confi- 
dently withdraw himself from communion with Nestorius 
before communicating these things to His Holiness. 

* Deign, therefore, to decide what seems right (Tvrr&aat, to 
Sokovp), whether we ought to communicate at all with him, 



\ 
I 




—452 



WHO PASSES SENTENCE 



309 



or to tell him plainly that no one communicates with a person 
who holds and teaches what he does. Further, the purpose 
of your Holiness ought to be made known by letter to the 
most religious and God-loving bishops of Macedonia, and to 
all the bishops of the East, for we shall then give them, accord- 
ing to their desire, the opportunity of standing together in 
unity of soul and mind, and lead them to contend earnestly 
(hrarftovlaaadai) for the orthodox Faith which is being attacked. 
As regards Nestorius, our fathers, who have said that the 
Holy Virgin is the mother of God, are, together with us who 
are here to-day, involved in anathema ; for although he did 
not like to do this with his own lips, still, by sitting and 
listening to another, viz. Dorotheus, he has helped him to 
do it, for immediately on coming from the throne he com- 
municated him at the holy mysteries. ' He (St. Cyril) has 
therefore sent his Holiness the materials for forming a 
judgment. 

V. St. Celestine in a beautiful letter, in answer, expresses 
his joy in the midst of sadness at Cyril's purity of faith. He 
endorses his teaching, and embraces him in the Lord, as 
present in his letters. Still (says the Pope) we are of one 
mind concerning Christ our Lord ! He compares Cyril to a 
good shepherd, and Nestorius not even to a hireling, but to a 
wolf, who is destroying his own sheep. Our Lord Jesus 
Christ, whose own ' generation ' is questioned, shows us that 
we should toil for one sheep ; how much more for one shep- 
herd ! We ought, therefore, ' to shut him out from the 
sheep, unless there is hope of his conversion. This we 
earnestly desire. But if he persists, an open sentence must 
be passed on him, for a wound, when it affects the whole 
body, must be at once cut away. For what has he to do with 
those who are of one mind amongst themselves — he who con- 
siders that he alone knows what is best, and dissents from 
our faith ? Let then all those whom he has removed remain 
in communion [with the Church], and give him to understand 
that he cannot be in communion with us if he persists in 
this path of perversity in opposition to the Apostolic teaching. 
Wherefore assuming the authority of our See, and acting in our 
stead and place with delegated authority (k^ovaia), you shall 




310 



AGAINST NESTORIUS, 



a.d. 400 



execute a sentence of this kind (i/c/3i/3d<reis airb$a<riv) , not with- 
out strict severity, viz. that unless within ten days after this 
admonition of ours he anathematises, in written confession, 
his evil teaching, and promises for the future to confess the 
faith concerning the birth of Christ our God, which both the 
Church of Rome and that of your Holiness, and the whole 
Christian religion preaches, forthwith your Holiness will 
provide for that Church. And let him know that he is to be 
altogether removed from our body. . . . We have written the 
same to our brothers and fellow-bishops John, Rufus, Juvenal, 
and Flavian, whereby our judgment concerning him, yea rather, 
the judgment of Christ our Lord, may be manifest.' 

It would be impossible to express with greater clearness 
the claim involved in the Papal supremacy, as understood at 
this hour, than is done by these two letters. ' Confirm thy 
brethren' was the divine injunction to the Prince of the 
Apostles ; 1 1 have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not ; 
thou, in thy turn, confirm thy brethren.' 1 Celestine was 
now exemplifying this law of the Church's life, and in doing 
so he did but add one more to the number of saintly Popes 
who had already been conspicuous for the support they 
rendered to the rest of the orthodox bishops in the defence 
of the great mystery of our Faith : e.g. St. Dionysius support- 
ing one bishop of Alexandria previous to the Arian struggle, 
St. Julius another, the great Confessor Bishop of Alexandrias 
in the midst of that struggle; St. Damasus supporting the 
bishops in general in the struggle with the Macedonian heresy ; 
and now, St. Celestine * confirming ' St. Cyril. And in each 

1 Dr. Dollinger parodies the Church's application of this text to the successor * 
of St. Peter when he calls it 4 far from being a guarantee of infallibility for 
every single dictum on an article of ecclesiastical doctrine.' No theologian ever 
laid down such a childish principle, nor did the Church ever call on Dr. Dollinger 
to believe it. He insinuates the same absurdity when he says, * the exhortation 
that Peter should strengthen his brethren by no means involves a promise that 
he would really do so in every single instance. 9 * Our Lord promises the security 
arising from his own prayer ; and that security need not be, and never was f 
stretched to include * every single instance,' of whatsoever kind. 

It will be admited, however, that in the subject-matter of Celestine's letter, 
the very foundations of our holy Faith were concerned. 



* Declaration* and Letter* on the Vatican Decree; Eng. trans, p. 12. 




UNLESS HE REPENTS. 



311 



case the support was rendered by the See of St Peter lees in 
the way of argument than by a simple faithfulness to the 
tradition of the Church : more, that is, in a divine than a 
human way, more by authority than by dialectic skill. The 
Church Uvea on authority, not on argument, even as our 
Lord * spake as one having authority/ and not as the Scribes 
and Pharisees with their subtle dialectic. St. Agatho, when 
he Bent his legates to the Sixth Council, said that they were 
not versed in subtle interpretations of the Scriptures — such 
as had so frequently led the East astray — nor were they illus- 
trious in eloquence, but they had something better, viz. a full 
knowledge of the 'tradition of the Apostolic See, as it has 
been maintained by my predecessors, the Apostolic Pontiffs.' 
This was real history, and this they possessed. Nestorius 
expressed his contempt for the Holy See when condemned 
by it, and affected to despise St. Celestine. He called him 
' one too simple to fathom the force of the doctrines.' But, 
as Dr. Pusey well remarks, 1 ' It did not occur to Nestorius 
that divine truth is seen by simple piety, not by proud in- 
tellect.' The letters of Celestine are by no means devoid of 
argumentative power at times ; they are, however, more the 
letters of a man of strong character in high authority than of 
the dialectician or the orator. He writes as one steeped in 
the writings of prophets, evangelists, and apostles, but his 
piety is of a masculine character, and his Scriptural quota- 
tions are full of point. This particular letter to St. Cyril 
played a most important part in the history of Christian 
doctrine, for it was referred to as authoritative by the council 
itself, and as determining their synodical act. 

VI. The two letters together, St. Cyril's and St. Celestine's, 
contain the following important points. 

(i.) It was an ' ancient custom,' according to St. Cyril, for 
such important matters as the deposition of an heretical arch- 
bishop to be referred to Borne. St. Cyril says that he writes 
to Borne ' as a matter of necessity.' He does not even sepa- 
rate Nestorius from communion with his own patriarchate 
until he has written to Borne. 

(ii.) He asks St. Celestine to prescribe what he judges best 

1 Introd. to some Works of Cyril, p. 64. Lib. of the Fathers. 




312 



THE BEARING OF THESE LETTERS 



a.d. 400 



in the matter ; to give the formal decision on this important 
case, and to notify his decision to all the bishops of the East. 
Canon Bright merely calls this writing in 'very deferential 
terms * 1 to the Bishop of Rome. Would it not surprise some 
of his readers to know how deferential the terms of St. Cyril's 
letter were ? He uses a word which occurs again and again 
in the Acts of the councils in reference to the relation of the 
Pope to the condemnation of Nestorius, asking him Tvrr&acu 
to hoKovv — words which are a sort of refrain for a year to 
come ; they form the key-note to the proceedings at Ephesus. 
Bossuet remarks upon this expression, that 'it signifies, in 
Greek, to declare juridically ; rviros is a rule, a sentence, and 
Tvrr&acu to Zokovv is to declare one's opinion judicially. The 
Pope alone could do it. Neither Cyril, nor any other patriarch, 
had the power to depose Nestorius, who was not their subject: 
the Pope alone did it, and no one was found to exclaim against 
it, because his authority extended over all/ 

(iii.) St. Celestine adopts throughout his letter to Nes- 
torius, sent with the above letter to Cyril, the same tone 
of authority as he uses in writing to Cyril. He writes with 
affectionate anxiety for Nestorius, but with the authority of 
office. He has no doubt about his prerogative of infallibility in 
such a matter, and does not hesitate to express his conviction. 

Dean Church, in defending 8 his position, and that of others 
who appeal to the early Church, says that he finds only a 
mitigated measure of authority ' in the early and undivided 
Church, and there was no such thing known as infallibility.' 
And this he calls ' a certain fact,' including in the early and 
undivided Church the time of the great councils. 

But St. Celestine, on being appealed to by St. Cyril to 
formulate the decision as to Nestorius' excommunication and 
deposition, at once assumes his infallibility 3 in such a grave 
matter. The Vatican decree does not go beyond his words, 
when he says of his own sentence on Nestorius, that it is not 
so much his, but rather it is ' the divine judgment of Christ 
our Lord ; ' and again to the Patriarch of Antioch he says. 



1 Diet. ofChr. Biog. art. 4 Cyril,' p. 766. 

* The Oxford Movement, by Dean Church, p. 185. 

* As to the matter of faith. 




—452 



ON PAPAL JURISDICTION. 



313 



' and let your Holiness know this sentence is passed by us, 
yea, rather by Christ [our] God.' Just as afterwards the 
synod, writing to the clergy of Constantinople, calls the 
executed sentence, being that of Pope and council together, 
'the just sentence of the Holy Trinity and their [i.e. the 
bishops' and legates'] divinely inspired judgment.' 

(iv.) And again, Celestine is here pronouncing judgment 
as to what is preached by the ' whole Christian religion,' and 
decides to cut off Nestorius from the common unity. 

VII. Dr. Wordsworth speaks of this all-important letter as 
being simply a statement of 'the orthodox doctrine of the 
Western Fathers ' upon the controversy ! 1 Celestine, however, 
states that he is giving the doctrine of the Church of Rome 
and Alexandria and 1 the whole Christian religion,' or, as he 
expresses it in his letter to Nestorius (going over the same 
ground), ' the universal Church.' Canon Bright 2 describes it 
thus: 

' Celestine gave Cyril a commission of stringent character 
(Mansi, iv. 1017). He was "to join the authority of the 
Roman See to his own, 9 and on the part of Celestine, as well as 
for himself, to warn Nestorius that unless a written retractation 
were executed within ten days, giving assurance of his accept- 
ance of the faith as to " Christ our God," which was held by 
the Churches of Rome and Alexandria , he would be excluded 
from the communion of those Churches, and provision would 
be made by them for the Church of Constantinople, i.e. by 
the appointment of an orthodox bishop.' 3 

Now, St. Celestine does not say exactly ' join the autho- 
rity of the Roman See to his own,' which Canon Bright 
gives as a quotation. There is nothing in the Latin or Greek 
exactly corresponding to 1 his own ; ' words which would sug- 
gest something more than the Papal decision as the source of 
authority. 4 Neither does Celestine bid St. Cyril warn Nestorius 
* on the part of Celestine as iveU as for himself. 9 He simply 
constitutes St. Cyril his ' plenipotentiary,' as Dr. Dollinger 

1 Church History, vol. iv. p. 210. 

1 Dictionary of Christian Biography, art. 1 Cyril/ p. 766. 

* The italics are mine. 

* Greek <rol, Latin « adscita '—simply terms with which a legate might be 
commissioned to act. 




314 



CANON BRIGHT MISTAKEN. 



a.d. 100 



accurately expressed it. 1 Neither, again, does Celestine speak 
of the faith held by the Churches of Borne and Alexandria 
simply, but he adds that it is that of the entire Christian world 
or religion. And further, which is of much greater importance, 
he tells Nestorius in the same batch of letters which Cyril was 
to read and forward, that he will exclude him, not from the 
communion of ' those Churches ' only, but from the communion 
also of the entire Christian Church. This latter point is of 
supreme importance, and it is strange that Dr. Bright should 
omit it. 2 In this very letter Celestine speaks of Nestorius being 
separated from ' our body/ by which from the contextual use 
of * our,' he could not mean simply his own, nor only his own 
and Cyril's, but the whole body of the Church. Anyhow, in 
his letter to Nestorius, which St. Cyril was to read and forward, 
and which covers the same ground, the Pope says expressly 
that by this sentence, unless he retracts, he is cut off from the 
communion of ' the whole Catholic Church (' ab universalis te 
Ecclesiae Catholic® communione dejectum).' This is a vital 
point, and it is surely not fair to tell the reader that Celestine 
bade Cyril warn Nestorius that he was to be cut off from the 
communion of 'those Churches' (viz. Borne and Alexandria) 
when, as a matter of fact, he was telling him that he was to 
be cut off from the communion of the whole Catholic Church. 
They are words, too, which recur, for in writing to the 
clergy and people of Constantinople the Pope repeats the sen- 
tence in full, which Cyril is to pass on Nestorius. And while 
he speaks again of the faiths held, not only by the Churches of 
Borne and Alexandria, but by ' the whole Catholic Church,' he 
says that Nestorius is to be ' excommunicated from the entire 
Catholic Church.' The same occurs once more in the Pope's 
letter to John of Antioch. The Pope there again speaks as 
clothed with supreme authority, calling his sentence ' the sen- 
tence passed by Christ our God,' and it cuts Nestorius off from 
1 the roll of bishops ' (' episcoporum ccetu '). 

St. Celestine thus comes before us at the Council of 
Ephesus as the foundation of the Church in a crisis of her life 

1 4 Bevollmachtiger,' Lehrbueh (1843), p. 121. 

* The same misleading expression (Borne and Alexandria) oocurs in this 
writer's latest work, Waymarks, Ac. p. 221. 




—452 CYRIL ACTS ON THE POPE'S DECREE. 315 



when the reality of our Lord's redemption was at stake, for 
this was the real point at issue, as he himself and St. Cyril 
distinctly stated. He is the ' confirmer ' of the brethren. He 
feeds, or governs, the sheep of Christ, supplying them with the 
two*, or authoritative judicial sentence, the form which was 
to govern their action. He resumes in himself the apostolic 
government of the Christian Church, and uses the Archbishop 
of Alexandria, occupant of the second throne in Christendom, 
to execute his sentence. 

VIII. The execution, then, of the Pope's sentence having 
been entrusted to Cyril, the latter at once wrote to John, 
Bishop of Antioch, on the state of things. He entreats him to 
consider what lie will do* St. Cyril must have been well aware 
that he was treading on delicate ground, for Nestorius had 
been recommended for the See of Constantinople by the 
Patriarch of Antioch, and the event proved how little John 
was to be depended upon. Cyril says (M. iv. 1051) : 

' We shall follow the decisions given by him [Celestine], 
fearing to lose the communion of such [i.e. the whole West], 
who have not been and are not angry with us on any other 
account ; considering, too, that the judgment and movement 
is not about matters of little moment, but on behalf of the 
very faith, and of the Churches which are everywhere dis- 
turbed, and of the edification of the people.' In other words, 
it was an ex cathedra judgment; it was on a matter of 



John of Antioch began well, and wrote to Nestorius, on re- 
ceiving the Papal decision, urging him to submit, on the 
ground that, although the time given by the Pope, viz. ten 
days, was indeed short, still it was a matter in which obedience 
need not be a matter of days even, but of a single hour ; and 
that the term ' Mother of God,' although capable of abuse, was 
one which the Fathers had used, and which, therefore, 
Nestorius could consent to use, attaching to it his own doubt- 
less orthodox meaning. The letter, although urging obedience, 
differs in its tone from Cyril's, and gives us already a glimpse 
of a spirit that subsequently led John of Antioch into schismatic 
action at Ephesus. 

St. Cyril wrote also to Juvenal of Jerusalem exhorting 



faith. 




316 



NESTORIUS, IN CONCERT 



a.d. 400 



him to assist in writing both to Nestorius and to the people in 
accordance with the prescribed decree (optaBsvra tvttov), i.e. 
the Papal decision, and suggested that pressure should be 
brought to bear upon the emperors. 

Meanwhile Cyril had summoned a synod at Alexandria, 
and in conjunction with the bishops, he drew up twelve 
anathematisms, which he forwarded to Nestorius with the 
Papal sentence. 

IX. Nestorius tried to turn the subject. He artfully 
appealed to the Pope to know what ought to be done about 
certain supposed disseminators of Apollinarian errors, with 
which he ceaselessly charged St. Cyril, and drew up in reply 
twelve counter-anathematisms, full of erroneous doctrine. 
But he had devised yet another plan for staying the execution 
of the sentence — like all heretics, he appealed to the civil 
power. In this he was probably prompted and joined by 
others, for there were at that time in Constantinople some 
disaffected spirits connected with Antioch. 

This city— that first heard the name of Christian applied 
to the followers of Jesus Christ — honoured by the Church as 
one of the three Sees of Peter — the third ' throne 9 in 
Christendom— had long proved a nursery of heretical teach- 
ing and religious dissension. Nestorius himself came from 
Antioch. Whilst there he had come across Theodore of 
Mopsuestia, the pupil of Diodorus, Bishop of Tarsus, who was 
the fountain, so far as we can trace things upwards, of all the 
mischief which occasioned the Council of Ephesus. In 
opposing Apollinarianism Diodorus had lost the balance of 
faith, and taught that the union of Godhead and Manhood in 
the Redeemer was not of substance with substance, but 
of two personalities; a union of name, authority, and 
honour. Theodore imbibed his error, and so great and 
lasting was the magic of Theodore's name that his memory 
had to be condemned in the Sixth Council. Nestorius had 
come under Theodore's influence. John of Antioch, in 
urging Nestorius to obey the Papal decision, alluded to 
Theodore's withdrawal of certain erroneous expressions as 
an encouragement ; being both of Antioch, they understood 
the value of such an appeal. 




—452 



WITH BISHOP JULIAN, 



317 



But there was another of Theodore's pupils, the Bishop 
Julian, a fellow-countryman of Nestorius, who entered into 
the lists with St. Augustine in favour of Pelagianism, and, 
with the usual modesty of heretics, compared himself to 
David, and Augustine to Goliath. This Julian had been 
deposed by the Holy See for his Pelagian teaching, and 
previous to the emergence of Nestorianism had found his way 
to Constantinople with some others in the hope of moving the 
emperor to call a council to reverse the sentence of the Pope. 
Two successive Bishops of Constantinople had refused to 
present him at Court. But it seems, from Celestine's letter 
to Nestorius, that the latter was on too friendly terms with 
Julian to please the Pope, and that but for his fear of 
Celestine he would have presented Julian to the emperor. 
When the See of Constantinople was vacant, Celestine had 
been anxious about its future occupant for this very reason, 
lest he should be one that would use his privilege of introduc- 
tion in favour of such ecclesiastical 1 lepers ' as Julian, and 
lead his Imperial Majesty to call a council for no adequate 
reason, and so simply disturb the peace of the Church. St. 
Augustine and the African Church had expressed themselves 
satisfied with the ruling of the Holy See in regard to 
Pelagianism. The expression ' Roma locuta est ; causa finita 
est' though not the actual words of St. Augustine, are the 
exact equivalent of what he did say. 1 The rescripts have 
come,' i.e. from Borne (which are St. Augustine's words) is 
the same as 1 Borne has spoken,' and the ' case is finished ' are 
his actual words. Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage, writing in 
the name of the African Church to the synod, goes out of his 
way to press this point, that the bishops of Africa had 
accepted the decision of the Holy See, and that the Synod of 
Ephesus had no right to re-open matters already settled by 
such authority. He speaks of novel doctrines which 'the 
authority of the Apostolic See and the judgment of the 
bishops agreeing together has defeated,' and submits that to 
treat these as open questions would be to discover a lack of 
faith. As a matter of fact, the Synod of Ephesus did allude 
to their case, not to re-open it, but to signify in express terms 
their adhesion en bloc to the decisions of the Holy See. 




318 



MOVES THE EMPEROR 



a.d. 400 



Julian, however, hoped much from a council, and seeing 
his opportunity in the appointment of Nestorius to the See of 
Constantinople, appears to have drawn him into a favourable 
inclination towards himself, which led him to sound Celestine 
as to what could be done in regard to such as Julian. 1 There 
was, indeed, a natural affinity between their heresies. 1 Where 
Pelagius ends, Nestorius begins/ said St. Prosper ; and ' Nes- 
torius erred concerning the head, Pelagius concerning the 
body,' said a council of Western bishops.* 

Nestorius then, probably assisted by Julian, turned to the 
emperor, and made for a general council. St. Cyril had 
sent four Egyptian bishops to Constantinople to deliver the 
above-mentioned letters of Celestine and himself to Nestorius 
with all due circumstance, and Nestorius seems to have been 
aware of their contents. But before they could reach Constanti- 
nople he had represented to the emperor that the Church was 
in a state of disturbance, and needed the remedy of a general 
council. Dr. Littledale says that ' the Pope joined in a 
petition to the emperor to convoke a general council as the 
only means of settling the dispute ' s — a flight of absurdity 
which we may leave to Canon Bright to correct, who says 
that 1 Celestine and Cyril were obliged to acquiesce in the 
decision of the emperor to convoke an oecumenical synod to 
meet at Ephesus on the following Whitsunday (June 4th, 
431) at the request of Nestorius.' It is going a little beyond 
the facts to say that the Pope and St. Cyril were ' obliged ' to 
acquiesce. The state of things in Constantinople, owing to 
the presence of Julian and other deposed bishops, may have 
made Celestine reluctant ; but the letter to the synod is full 
of rejoicing at its gathering. However that may be, St. 
Celestine gave his consent, and St. Leo's summary of the 
Council is that it was ' convoked by the precept of Christian 
princes and the consent of the Apostolical See 9 — a more 
adequate summary than Canon Bright's, 4 who does not 
mention ' the consent of the Apostolical See.' 5 

1 Ep. Celest ad Nest. 

* Cf . Chr. Lupus, Append, to Scholia on the Canons of Ephesus. 
1 Petrine Claims, p. 98. 

4 Bright's Notes on the Canons of the First Four Councils, p. 110. 

* Preface to Notes, dc. p. 6. 




—452 



TO CALL A COUNCIL. 



319 



Nestorius appears to have worked his plan well. He 
accused St. Cyril of Apollinarianism, and of generally disturb- 
ing the peace of the Church. And it is important to remember 
that it was to settle the question between Cyril and Nestorius 
that the emperor, Theodosius II., summoned the metropolitans 
of the East and a certain number of attendant bishops to 
Ephesus. It was with no idea of settling matters between 
Borne and Nestorius, for the emperor had received no in- 
timation of the sentence passed by Celestine. The idea in 
the mind of the emperor was that Cyril should be on his trial 
as a disturber of the peace and a restorer of Apollinarianism, 
and he probably expected Nestorius to take the prominent 
position. He disliked Cyril, and specially resented his attempt 
to secure the sympathy of the Empresses on the side of 
orthodoxy. He was just then growing jealous of Pulcheria's 
increasing influence, and Cyril had written her a long and 
magnificent letter on the doctrine of the Incarnation. We 
know also from a letter of Cyril's that Nestorius hoped to be 
president. The Council was thus, as Dr. Pusey has well 
remarked, a 1 device of Nestorius/ 1 although it had been 
seconded by the monks who had been ill treated by him, and 
had urged the emperor in their despair to convoke a general 
synod. They did not know what had been done at Eome. 

X. But on arriving at Ephesus some time before Pente- 
cost, in the hope, doubtless, of influencing the inauguration of 
the council, Nestorius was rudely undeceived by the attitude 
which Memnon, the bishop of the diocese, assumed at once 
towards himself and his episcopal sympathisers. The doors 
of St. Mary's Church were closed against them. They com- 
plained to the emperor that th<-y could not celebrate the 

1 Dr. Pusey's account of the council, written quite at the end of his life as a 
preface, or a continuation of his son's preface, to some works of St. Cyril, is, 
probably, the best account of the council that any Anglican has written. He 
very successfully clears St. Cyril from the aspersions on his character which Dr. 
Salmon repeats. In that particular point Dr. Wordsworth and Dr. Bright are 
honourable exceptions to the usual Anglican view of the great saint. Even Dr. 
Newman, in his Anglican days, falls far below these three writers in the matter 
(Histor. Sketches), and Dr. Salmon ought not to quote his estimate of Cyril as 
that of * Cardinal ' Newman without noticing the preface which he prefixed as 
Cardinal (Salmon's Infallibility of the Church, p. 307, 2nd edition). 




320 



JOHN OF ANTIOCH KEEPS AWAY. 



a.d. 400 



liturgy of Pentecost in the churches of Ephesus. Bishop 
after bishop, on arriving, must have strengthened Nestorius' 
conviction that the Papal sentence was accepted, and that the 
bishops had come, as Count Gandidian, the imperial commis- 
sioner, afterwards complained, 1 not so much to investigate, as 
to execute a sentence already passed. Accordingly, as we shall 
presently see, Nestorius absented himself from the synod. 

The day of Pentecost had come, and John, Patriarch of 
Antioch, had not arrived. Day after day passed, and no 
Bishop of Antioch. At length bishops came with a message 
from him that they were not to wait. 2 Some bishops had 
already fallen ill, many felt the fearful pressure of the want 
of accommodation, and at last some of them died. As they 
said the Requiem Mass of one bishop after another, the 
survivors must have felt keenly the cruelty of the Patriarch 
of Antioch's procrastination. They knew it to be of set pur- 
pose. The synod, in its report to the emperor, assured His 
Majesty of their conviction that John had delayed from a 
desire not to be present at Nestorius' condemnation. He 
allowed friendship to gain the day over zeal for the truth. 
Accordingly, the bishops began to * cry out * 3 against Cyril 
for not beginning ; and Cyril yielded to their wishes, himself 
convinced that John of Antioch did not wish to be present. 

On the sixteenth day after Pentecost the synod began its 
sessions. Dr. Salmon's caustic remarks on the disorderliness 
of the councils of the Church certainly do not apply to the 
sessions of this council. He ignores the judicial, orderly, and 
even majestic tone of the synod itself, and takes his descrip- 
tion from circumstances that took place outside the walls of 
the church, and he relies too unreservedly on the accounts of 
the schismatics, and further includes in the ' councils of the 
Church ' the Robber Council of Ephesus which succeeded the 
(Ecumenical Council. 4 No wonder he can speak so slightingly 
of councils, when he confuses ' concilia ' and 1 conciUabula,' 
and prefers the accounts of heretics to the narratives of the 
synod itself. The letter of the synod to the Pope would have 

» Cf. Acta ConcUiabuli adv. CyriUum. * * if I delay. 1 Cf. p. 841. 

• Of. Ep. Cyr. ad Cler. Const. 

4 Infallibility of the Church, p. 313 et seq. 




—452 



THE POPE PRESIDED 



321 



quite spoilt his thesis, if he had taken that for his authority 
instead of the letter of the schismatics to the emperor. 

XI. Who, then, presided over the council that now met in 
the Church of St. Mary? According to Dr. Salmon, 'the 
theory had not yet been heard of in the East which would 
ascribe the headship of all councils to the Bishop of Rome, 
present or absent,' 1 and, accordingly, he denies that Celestine 
was in any sense president at Ephesus. The Bishops of 
Chalcedon, who asked for delay that they might understand, 
and thus give an intelligent adhesion to the Tome of St. Leo, 
thought otherwise, for they speak of the Council of Ephesus 
as that 1 of which the most blessed Celestine, the president 
of the Apostolic chair, and the most blessed Cyril of great 
Alexandria, were the governors or presidents,' 2 whilst the 
Council of Chalcedon, in its definition of faith, expressly says 
that the Council of Ephesus was presided over by ' Celestine 
and Cyril.' And the emperors, in their letter after the Council 
of Chalcedon, confirming the sentence against Eutyches and 
the monks who sympathised with him, speak of the Ephesine 
synod as the occasion ' when the error of Nestorius was ex- 
cluded, under the presidency of Celestine, of the city of Rome, 
and Cyril, of the city of Alexandria.' The Empress Pulcheria 
uses the same expression. We have, too, a large number of 
letters from various bishops to the Emperor Leo, written after 
the Council of Chalcedon, in reference to the troubles at Alex- 
andria under Bishop Timothy, most of which allude to the 
Council of Ephesus, and attribute the presidency to Celestine 
as well as to Cyril. 3 For instance, certain European bishops 
(and we presume that Dr. Salmon will not rule their witness 
out of court, coinciding as it does with the 600 bishops of 
Chalcedon, almost all of them Eastern) depose that the Council 
of Ephesus was gathered together ' under Celestine, of blessed 
memory, the successor of the holy and venerable Peter, the 
guardian of the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and under 
Cyril, Pontiff of Alexandria, of holy memory.' And the 
bishops of the province of Isauria speak of Cyril, ' who for- 
merly governed the Church of Alexandria, and openly fought 
against the folly of Nestorius, and was partaker with blessed 

1 Loc. ext. 3 Kvfcprifrai. » Mansi, t. vii. 539-623. 



Y 




822 



THROUGH ST. CYRIL, WHO HELD 



a.d. 400 



Celestine, the Shepherd of the Safe Church of the Romans/ 
This latter, however, does not necessarily involve presidency. 
But Julian, Bishop of Cos, in his letter to the emperor, calls 
the Council of Ephesus that over which presided the thrice 
blessed 'and most holy Fathers, Celestine, Pontiff of the 
Roman city, and Cyril, Bishop of Alexandria. 9 And again, 
the bishops of Upper Armenia call the council that 1 of which 
the presidents were Celestine and Cyril . . . who chiefly shone 
for them against the wicked blasphemy of Nestorius.' These 
are but specimens of the letters of the bishops to the same effect. 

St. Celestine, then, was the real president of the council, 
but he presided through St. Cyril, who sat in his name. 
Canon Bright says that Cyril presided ' not in virtue of the 
commission from Celestine to act in his stead, which had 
already been acted upon in the Alexandrian Council of Novem- 
ber — but as the prelate of highest dignity then present, and 
as holding the proxy and representing the mind of the Roman 
bishop, until the Roman legates should arrive.' 1 But the 
Acts expressly state, again and again, that Cyril held, not 
* the proxy,* but 1 the place 9 of Celestine.* And it does not 
Mow, because the original commission had been ' acted upon ' 
in November, that it had been exhausted in June. Its very 
terms imply its continuance until the sentence was executed 
or remitted. 3 

St. Cyril's position was probably due to two causes : first, 
as the Bishop of Alexandria, the second ' See of Peter,' he 
was the natural representative of the Bishop of Rome ; and, 
secondly, he had been originally commissioned by Celestine 
to act 'in our stead and place,' in * the affairs ' of Nestorius. 
Those ' affairs ' were not yet finished, and there had been no 
limitation in point of time, nor subsequent withdrawal, in 
respect of his commission. That Cyril considered himself to 
be acting as the representative of Celestine, by his commission, 
appears from his question to Celestine, asking him what he 
should do in case of Nestorius' retractation. The commission 
did not express his duty in that event ; and Cyril accordingly 
wrote, as we know from Celestine's letter, 4 to know what his 

» Diet, of Chr. Biogr. p. 706. * E.g. Mansi, t. iv. p. 1123. 

' Cf. p. 809. 4 Ep. Cel. ad Cyr. in fine, Aot ii. 




—452 



A PAPAL COMMISSION, 



323 



duty would be under such a happy circumstance. He wanted 
to know whether he should treat Nestorius as no longer a 
bishop, now that the ten days' grace had elapsed. It is cer- 
tain from this that St. Cyril considered Celestine's sentence as 
final, and that he only consented to deal with Nestorius as a 
bishop by reason of Celestine's permission, which accorded to 
the heretic a fresh opportunity of retractation. St. Celestine 
says that he leaves that matter to Cyril, in conjunction with 
the synod. 'It belongs to your Holiness,' are the Pope's words, 
' with the venerable counsel of the brethren, to put down the 
disturbances that have arisen in the Church, and that we 
should learn that the matter has been completed (God helping) 
by the desired correction.' St. Celestine also says that if 
Nestorius continues in his sin, he will reap the fruit of what 
will be his own act, manentibus statutis prioribw, the previous 
decisions remaining in force. 

It is therefore clear that the Pope's sentence was not so 
much suspended as devolved upon the council. Had the 
emperor been orthodox, and not caught by the wiles of 
Nestorius, he would not have been as keen about the council 
as he was. The Pope, however, acted in accordance with the 
rule which St. Gregory the Great also afterwards laid down 
in such matters, viz. that of submitting to the imperial wishes 
when they did not run counter to the canons. He expresses 
the fullest confidence in Cyril and the council, that they will 
execute the sentence he had passed, with the more solemn 
apparatus of a conciliar adhesion to the twos which he had 
sent to Cyril, Nestorius, and John of Antioch. 1 He looked 
upon Cyril as the teacher of the council, and virtually owns 
the commission originally given as still running. The council, 
therefore, acted with the full permission of the Pope in utilis- 
ing the imperial convention for giving Nestorius every chance 
of repentance before executing the original sentence ; and 
St. Cyril acted under commission from the Pope. 

There is a letter extant, written by two Alexandrian clerics 
towards the end of this century, and used by the episcopal 
legates from Pope Anastasius to the emperor of the same 
name, which confirms the account here given of St. Cyril's 

1 rap' rtfi&v vd\cu dpiadirra. Ep. ad Syn. M. iv. 1287. 



y 2 




324 



WHICH WAS NECESSARY 



A.D. 400 



position. In this letter they say that, ' whenever in doubtful 
matters any councils of bishops are held, His Holiness, who 
presides over the Church of Borne, used to select the Most 
Reverend Archbishop of Alexandria to undertake the charge 
of his own place.' In the case of the Ephesine Council, it 
was doubly natural that the Patriarch of Alexandria should be 
' selected ' by Celestine as being the foremost champion of the 
truth assailed, and as having already had to deal with it in 
Celestine's name. 

There were also peculiar circumstances in this case which 
would have rendered it difficult for St. Cyril to have assumed 
that presidency with any chance of success, unless he had had 
such a special intimation of the Pope's wish in the matter, or 
felt that he was but continuing on the ground of the original 
commission from Celestine to execute his sentence. For that 
it was for this purpose that the council, despite the ideas of 
the emperor, considered itself convoked, will presently appear. 

The circumstances that rendered the position peculiarly 
difficult for St. Cyril were these. At the first session, the 
imperial letter, which called the bishops together, appears to 
have been read, at the suggestion of Juvenal, Bishop of Jeru- 
salem, by Peter, the Alexandrian notary, and the question 
was then asked how long an interval had elapsed since the 
day fixed by the emperor for the meeting of the synod. 
Memnon, Bishop of Ephesus, gave the number of days, and 
immediately upon this St. Cyril proposed that without further 
delay they should proceed to business, speaking of a ' second 
decree' which, he says, had been read to them by Count 
Candidian, the imperial representative. But there is no 
account (cf. Act I.) of this decree having been read. There 
is, therefore, a hiatus in the record, which has been either 
mutilated or abbreviated. But the account of the schismatic 
synod held by John of Antioch on his arrival, supplies a key 
to the missing portion of the record. That synod laid the 
greatest stress on the infringement, by Cyril and Memnon, of 
the imperial decree. Count Candidian told them he had been 
induced to read that decree under great pressure. He wished 
to wait for John before reading it, probably a device for 
putting off the synod; but Cyril compelled him to read it, 




-452 



UNDER THE CIRCUMSTANCES 



325 



on the ground that otherwise they could not know the 
emperor's desires. Now they knew, apart from this, that the 
emperor desired them to meet at Pentecost, and that all the 
metropolitans available were to attend. The decree, therefore, 
could not have related solely or principally to that point. The 
copy, as we have it, is without the same formal ending as 
that which was read by Peter, and so we cannot be sure that 
we have the whole of it. Indeed, its recovery at all is of later 
date, and the two copies are not in perfect agreement. And 
Nestorius' letter to the emperor adds one point which is not 
in the decree as we have it. 

It would seem, then, as if this decree (difiiafia) were some- 
thing to be distinguished from the letter (ypdfifia) read by 
Peter, and contained some fuller provision for the ordering of 
the council, which was set aside by the council itself. The 
letters of the schismatics to the synod, to the emperors, to 
the empress,.to the clergy of Constantinople, and to its senate, 
all speak of the violation of this imperial decree. In the 
letter of the schismatics to the emperor they speak of John's 
absence from the synod under Cyril as contrary to his order, 
and add that the council had also infringed the imperial 
decree, as though in some further way. 

In point of fact, we learn from St. Cyril that Nestorius 
had hoped to preside at the council. The emperor, we know, 
considered Cyril the guilty party. And it seems probable 
that Nestorius, by accusing Cyril of Apollinarianism, and by 
his dexterous management of the emperor, hoped to turn the 
council into an occasion of examining Cyril. Count Irenaeus, 
in writing to the Orientals, says that if the right order, i.e. 
that which the emperor prescribed, had been observed, the 
constitution of the council would have been different, and the 
' Egyptian ' (as he called St. Cyril) ' would not have had it 
in his power ' to condemn Nestorius. We may presume that 
only two bishops would have attended each metropolitan, 1 and 
those only such as, according to Nestorius' conceit, understood 
such matters, 3 and we know that Count Irenseus also meant 
that Cyril would not have sat as judge, being himself one of those 
under trial (ovSe tcpivuv ws eh £>p twv Kpivopivtov rjSuvaro), 

1 Of. the imperial letter read by Peter. 2 Cf. Ep. Nest, ad Imper. 




326 



OF IMPERIAL OPPOSITION. a.d. 400 



nor, continues the count, 1 would he have been able to touch 
the matter at all, acting as he did contrary to the judgment 
of the most noble Count Candidian ' — from which it is evi- 
dent that Candidian's contention was that Cyril could not sit 
as judge of Nestorius. In fact, the imperial decree must have 
resembled that of Constantine in regard to the Council of 
Tyre, and the order of Theodosius later on, by which he 
assigned the presidency of the Robber Council to Dioscorus. 

All this was contrary to the canons. And accordingly, at 
the Council of Ephesus, St. Cyril, either ignoring that part 
of the decree which related to the mode of procedure, and in 
obedience only to the rest, or by the expressed desire of the 
council, or producing the commission he had received from 
Celestine, continued to occupy the president's seat ; and the 
council preferred the canons, and the Papal appointment, to 
the imperial decree. Candidian left the council on the ground, 
as he said afterwards, 1 that he considered the imperial decree 
was not going to be obeyed. He had been compelled by Cyril 
to read the decree against his wish. And he must have seen 
very plainly that the condemnation of Nestorius was a fore- 
gone conclusion. There is no reason, on this interpretation, 
to suppose that Count Candidian told a barefaced lie, as the 
scholiast notes in the margin; but merely that he was an 
Erastian, and sympathised with Nestorius. He would have 
liked Cyril to have been placed, as it were, in the witness- 
box ; he would have liked a discussion as to what the Church 
believed on the doctrinal question ; whereas there was to be 
no real discussion, but all would be settled by acclamation, 
and bishops would simply testify to the faith in which they 
had been baptised, and for the guardianship of which they had 
been consecrated to their high office. So he complained that 
there was no real investigation. In fact, the synod, as we 
shall see, did not exhibit the features of a debating club, nor 
enter upon Biblical criticism, but simply gave its judgment, 
bishop after bishop, as to the heterodoxy of Nestorius and the 
orthodoxy of Cyril, and (which was as important a point as 
any) as to whether Nestorius had continued teaching his 
heresy since the Papal judgment, so that its provisions re- 
mained in force. 



1 Acta Conciliab. adv. CyriUum. Mansi, iv. 1262. 




—452 



POPE CELESTINE THE PILOT 



327 



In concluding this part of the subject, I must express my 
astonishment at the utterly unhistorical position which Dr. 
Salmon has taken up in regard to another point ; and that 
too, whilst he is so vigorously opposing the infallibility of the 
Holy See on the grounds of history. He gives what he 
considers a convincing proof against the existence of any 
belief in that doctrine, drawn from the history of these early 
councils. He says : 

1 The only one of the great controversies in which the Pope 
really did his part in teaching Christians what to believe, was 
the Eutychian controversy. Leo the Great, instead of waiting, 
as Popes usually do, till the question was settled, published his 
sentiments at the beginning, and his letter to Flavian was 
adopted by the Council of Chalcedon. This is what would 
have always happened if God had really made the Pope the 
guide to the Church. But this case is quite exceptional, result- 
ing from the accident that Leo was a good theologian, besides 
being a man of great vigour of character. No similar influence 
was exercised either by his predecessors or successors.* 1 

It would be impossible to pen a sentence in more flagrant 
contradiction to the evidence afforded by the history of the 
Council of Ephesus. 

In the letters of the bishops from all parts of Christendom, 
which Dr. Salmon will find collected by Labbe, after the 
Council of Chalcedon, the name of Celestine is of constant 
occurrence, and always as having been the Kvfiepvr)TT)$, or pilot, 
in the matter of Nestorius, whilst the bishops themselves 
speak of him as ' the guardian of the faith ' (cf. Act II.), and 
the council, as we shall see presently, relies on his letter as 
the tvttos on which it framed its judgment. 

Here, then we leave the various parties concerned : Cyril 
in the performance of his duty, presiding over the council in 
St. Mary's Church at Ephesus, with some 200 bishops round 
him ; Nestorius remaining in his own house, prepared to ignore 
the council — he, as St. Celestine said, who appealed to it, not 
appearing ; John of Antioch remaining at an easy distance 
from Ephesus out of friendship to Nestorius, in whose con- 

1 Salmon on the Infallibility of the Church, p. 426, 2nd edition. Cf. supra, 
p. 278. 2 Mansi, iv. 1287. 




328 



OF THE WHOLE MATTER 



a.d. 400—462 



demnation he was loth to join; Candidian, the Imperial 
commissioner, having left St. Mary's in disgust at the turn 
that things were taking ; and the people of Ephesus, who had 
inherited an affectionate devotion to the Mother of God (who 
had lived nearly four hundred years ago in their midst, and 
under whose patronage their great church was placed), in a 
state of the greatest excitement, waiting for her great foe to 
be condemned ; and far away the good Pope lifting up his 
hands on the mountain, and preparing to send fresh legates 
to assist the maligned bishop, to whom the Papal sentence had 
been entrusted. 




CHAPTEE XIX. 



THE ACTS OP THE COUNCIL. 



I. So far, then, we have seen that Pope St. Celestine had, at 
the request of St. Cyril, decreed the sentence of deposition 
against Nestorius, and then left its execution (if Nestorius 
should remain obdurate) to St. Cyril and the council ; and 
that the Council (which was, as Dr. Pusey truly observes, 1 in 
its origin ' the device of Nestorius to ward off his condemna- 
tion,' but was agreed to by the Pope) at length met at 
Ephesus in the Church of ' St. Mary, Mother of God ' — ' an 
ill-omened scene ' (remarks Dean Milman *) * for the cause of 
Nestorius/ 

It proceeded to summon Nestorius to answer to the charges 
against him. Dr. Littledale, in the first edition of his ' Plain 
Reasons against joining the Church of Rome,' 3 gravely in- 
formed his readers that 1 the Third General Council of Ephesus 
disregarded the synodical deposition of Nestorius by Pope 
Celestine, and allowed him to take his seat as Patriarch of 
Constantinople.' We have already seen that the Pope h ad 
not deposed Nestorius at all, but devolved the execution of his 
sentence on the council. As to the second assertion, as Father 
Ryder pointed out, 4 it is ' quite curiously untrue, even for Dr* 
Littledale.' Nestorius was summoned, but in vain. Three times 
summoned, he refused to appear. He eventually grounded his 
refusal on the absence of John of Antioch. The council con- 
sidered the question of summoning him a fourth time, 5 but the 

1 8. Cyr. Alex. Tomes against Nestorius. Lib. of the Fathers, Preface by 
Dr. Pusey. 

* Hist of Latin Christianity, vol. i. p. 208. » P. 191. 

4 Catholic Controversy. Burns & Oates, 1881. * Mansi, t. iv. p. 1138. 




330 



THE EPISCOPAL JUDGMENT 



a.d. 400 



threefold summons satisfied the requirements of the canons. 
They accordingly, after reciting the Nicene Creed, proceeded, in 
obedience to canonical requirements, to place His teaching 
before them side by side with the teachings of St- Cyril. 

II. The mere fact that the bishops did so seems to some 
writers to indicate that they did not regard the Holy See as 
infallible in its judgments. But this is to forget that it was St. 
Celestine's expressed desire that they should satisfy themselves 
as to the heterodoxy of Nestorius. And his desire that they 
should thus give to his judgment a rational adhesion in no 
way indicates any doubt on his part as to his judgment being, 
as he himself called it, 1 that of our Lord Himself. It is in 
strict accordance with Catholic teaching that the bishops 
should be called upon to act thus. Those who oppose the 
Catholic Church in these days seem strangely unwilling to 
take her doctrine as to her claims from her own lips. She 
does not claim for the Holy See, as Dr. Bright 9 seems to make 
her claim, an apostolical authority which concentrates, in the 
sense of excluding, all other authority ; she does not claim in- 
fallibility for the Vicar of Christ as isolated from the body, 
but as its head, one with the body. This is so important 
that we will give the Catholic doctrine on the subject, as it is 
luminously expounded by one who, for his writings on this 
subject, received the special blessing of Pius IX. Father 
Bottalla says : 3 

' We maintain, with St. Cyprian and all the Fathers, that 
the bishops are as the circumference of a circle, so that in 
order to have perfect unity in the Church they must cleave to 
each other so far as to keep the pale of Christ's Church 
entirely closed against schismatics and heretics. Moreover, 
we maintain that the bislwps must cleave to the centre of the 
circle, so that they may be gathered into a perfect unity ; 4 and 
finally, that the chair of St. Peter and consequently the Pope, 
is the centre and the source of episcopal unity. In this view 
it is impossible to say that the circle is the centre alone, or 
that a centre of a circle could exist without any circumference. 
We cannot say that a human body is the head alone detached 

1 Mansi, t. iv. p. 1050. 2 Church History, p. 336. 

* In/all. of the Pope, p. 141. 4 Which implies an act of judgment. 




—452 



NOT A CONTRADICTION 



331 



from the rest, or that there could be a human head separated 
from a body acting in its normal manner. In like manner we 
cannot say that the Church without bishops is the whole, or 
that the Pope might act as Pope in a state of isolation from the 
episcopal body. ... If the Church be indefectible, it must be 
indefectible in unity of government as well as in unity of faith. 
In no case, then, can we conceive the Pope as in formal isolation 
from the episcopal body. . . . What is the province of the epi- 
scopal element in the monarchy of the Church ? It is certain, 
not only that the episcopal body can never be superseded 
in the Church by the Pope, but also that it can never be de- 
prived of its inherent jurisdiction in the general government 
of the Church, although there is no difficulty as to restrictions 
and limitations being placed by the Pope upon the exercise of 
their jurisdiction, should necessity require such a course. 
Moreover, the bishops, either in their own dioceses or in the 
oecumenical councils, are the natural judges of questions con- 
cerning faith, although under the guidance, and subject to the 
judgment, of the Roman Pontiff. . . . The power given to the 
aristocratic episcopal body was not intended by Christ to 
control or to reform the government and the teaching of the 
supreme ruler of the Church, but to give efficacy to his action 
on the whole body, to diffuse to every part the streams of 
divine life, and to draw tighter the bonds of unity which link 
together the whole structure.' 

The bishops, then, according to what some writers will 
persist in calling the Ultramontane theory, have a real function 
to perform in a general council. As Benedict XTV. says : 1 
1 Bishops in a general council assist (assident) the Supreme 
Pontiff, not as mere counsellors, but also as judges.' But as 
Fenelon said : 2 4 To judge after the judgment of the Pontiff is 
to join one'6 own judgment with that of the Pontiff. On this 
understanding the bishops in olden times subscribed the de- 
crees of the general councils. Their submission was a judg- 
ment and their judgment was submission.' 

The bishops, then, at the Council of Ephesus were called 
upon to pass judgment on the teaching of Nestorius, not with 

1 De Syn. Diasc. lib. xiii. c. 2, n. 2, 469. Bonus, 1755. 
* Instr. Pastor. April 20, 1715. 



Digitized by Google 



332 



OF PAPAL INFALLIBILITY 



a.d. 400 



the idea that the two*, or judicial sentence formulated by 
St. Celestine, could be revised, but to execute it, and to add 
the weight of their collective judgment to that of the Holy See. 
Their united judgment would give to the sentence an extension 
of weight, without adding to its intrinsic authority. 1 

Dean Milman's sarcasm is the simple truth : ' The Bishop 
of Constantinople was already a condemned heretic ; the 
business of the council was only the confirmation of their 
[Cyril and Celestine's] anathema,' &c. a 

Or, as Dr. Pusey correctly says : ' The mind of the Church 
had been expressed in the previous year.' 

And St. Celestine had told St. Cyril that, in spite of his 
having fixed so short a time for Nestorius to consider the 
question of retracting, he did not regret a certain delay which 
resulted from the apparatus of a council being called into 
action. 

III. Accordingly the members of the council, after reciting 
the Nicene Creed, and listening to Cyril's second letter to 
Nestorius, drawn up in synod in obedience to the commission 
entrusted to him by the Pope, for the most part one by one, 
stamped its contents with their episcopal approval. 8 Nestorius' 
letter was then read and solemnly condemned as containing 
heretical matter, by most bishops in turn individually, and by 
the rest collectively. Dr. Salmon's sweeping accusations 
against the councils of the Church do not hold in regard to 
at least this session of the Council of Ephesus. ' There was,' 
he says, 1 no idea then but that what one council had done 
another council might improve on ' — an assertion which he 
makes by way of proving that ' there was no suspicion of its 
infallibility,' i.e. of that of the Nicene settlement. 4 It is diffi- 
cult to understand how anyone could make the assertion in 
the face of all that is said to the contrary in the Acts of the 
Councils, or after reading the answers of the individual bishops 
in the first session at Ephesus. 5 

It was next proposed by the Bishop of Jerusalem that the 

1 * Extensive non intensive ' — Bellarmine. 

* Eist. of Latin Christianity, yoI. i. p. 206. 

■ Mansi, t. iv. pp. 1138-70. * InfaU. of the Church, p. 812. 

* Mansi, t. iv. pp. 1170-78. 




—462 



OR PAPAL SUPREMACY. 



333 



letter of St. Celestine should be read, which sentenced Nes- 
torius to excommunication from the universal Church. It 
was accordingly read, and received without discussion. 1 The 
place which this letter held in their estimation is seen in the 
report which the synod wrote to the emperors, in which they 
speak of it as having ' preceded their own judgment in the 
condemnation of the heretical dogmas of Nestorius,' and as 
having been indited by way of ' providing for the safety of the 
Churches and of the holy and life-giving faith as handed down 
to us by the holy Apostles, Evangelists, and holy Fathers,' 2 
and the supreme part which it played in the final condemna- 
tion of Nestorius is further stated, as we shall presently see, 
in the very terms of their own sentence. Further letters of 
St. Cyril's were then read, which, according to the declaration 
of Peter, the Alexandrian notary, were 1 in conformity with ' 
the Pope's letter just read. 

The actual delivery of the Pope's letter and of those of St. 
Cyril, which executed the Papal sentence, was then sworn to 
by proper witnesses, viz. the bishops who delivered them. 

One important point yet remained to be established. The 
Papal sentence was conditional on Nestorius' continued ob- 
stinacy. If he retracted, the council was authorised by the 
Pope 3 to deal with the matter as it might think best. Had 
Nestorius, then, continued to teach the same heresy ? He had. 
He had uttered his blasphemies in Ephesus itself. It was 
enough. It only remained to read some of the writings of the 
holy Fathers, whose teachings the Pope had delivered, 4 and, 
further, the opposed 1 blasphemies ' (as they called them) to 
be found in Nestorius' commentaries— together with a letter 
from Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage, in the name of the 
African Church, begging that ' the authority of the Apostolic 
See ' 5 might be respected, and all novelties repudiated— and 
they could now proceed to deliver the sentence. The terms 
of the sentence are of supreme importance for determining 
the place which the Holy See occupied in the judgment of the 

1 Manai, t. iv. p. 1179. 1 Ibid. t. iv. p. 1239 c. 

» Ep. Cel. ad Cyr., Mansi, t. iv. p. 1292. 

4 Cf. Relatio Syn. ad InvperaU, Harduin. p. 1099. 

* Mansi, t. iv. p. 1207. 



Digitized by 



334 



THE SENTENCE ON NESTORIUS 



a.d. 400 



Catholic bishops at Ephesus. Did they or did they not act 
in obedience to the Pope ? The terms of the sentence leave 
us in no doubt on this point. There are words in that 
sentence which are decisive, and which define the Eastern 
idea of Papal authority- The Fathers of the council speak 
of themselves as acting in obedience to the Holy See. They 
«ay they acted under necessity. They speak of Nestorius' 
disobedience to their summons having compelled them to 
enter on the investigation of his impious teachings in his 
absence ; of their having convicted him from his letters and 
-commentaries, and his utterances even in the city of Ephesus 
itself; and they proceed to say that 4 necessarily compelled by 
the canons and by the letter of our most Holy Father and fellow- 
minister Celestine,' 1 they had concurred after many tears in 
the sorrowful sentence to the effect that our Lord Jesus Christ, 
whom he had blasphemed, pronounces by this holy synod 
that he is deprived of his episcopal dignity and excluded from 
the assemblies of the Church. 

1 Necessarily compelled by the canons and by the letter of 
our most Holy Father and fellow-minister Celestine ! ' Such 
was their position. 

First, the canons. The reference is to their having acted 
in the absence of Nestorius. In several places they speak of 
their having satisfied the requirements of the canons through 
their threefold summons of the heretic. They had given him 
the opportunity of answering the charge brought against him, 
four bishops having repaired to his house to acquaint him of 
the position of things ; and John of Antioch had expressly 
commissioned two bishops to tell the synod not to wait for 
him. 1 Do your work/ were his words, ' if I delay.' There 
had therefore been no violation of canon law. By the canons 
they were free to act, and indeed compelled, although the 
guilty party was not present. 

Secondly, the womb out of which their entire action and 
their final judgment sprang was the letter of the Pope. 2 They 

1 Mansi, t. iv. pp. 1211-12. 

* The preposition by which they express their obedience to the canons is 
h*6 ; that by which they express their obedience to the letter of the Holy Father 
is Ac. That the words 4 necessarily compelled ' apply to the letter, as well as to 
the canons, is clear from the conjunctions used. 




—452 



AN ACT OF OBEDIENCE 



335 



were compelled to act by reason of the letter of him who was 
at once their 4 Holy Father ' and their * fellow-minister/ in 
other words, their equal in sacerdotal dignity, 1 but their 
superior in authority. He had been asked by St. Cyril rvw&aat 
to Sokovp, to formulate the dogmatic decree. He had given 
the rv7ro9 in the letters written to Cyril, Nestorius, the clergy 
of Constantinople, and John of Antioch, but especially in the 
letter to Nestorius which was read in synod. The council 
could do nothing else than yield obedience to this letter. This 
the bishops declare they have done. Their action in con- 
demning the Archbishop of Constantinople in his absence from 
the synod was covered by the canons; their action in con- 
demning him at all was, they averred, a simple necessity after 
the letter of the Pope. Although exercising a real judgment 
on the subject, as the record shows they did, they were yet 
under a moral impossibility of differing from the Papal 
sentence ; they were, they say, ' necessarily compelled [airo] 
by the canons and by [i*] the letter of the Holy Father ; ' 
and in delivering this sentence, which they thus declare to be 
in its origin and power that of the Pope, they profess to be 
acting with the authority of our Lord Jesus Christ. It is, 
they say, His sentence. What Celestine said of the sentence 
as it passed from his lips, that it was ' the judgment of Christ, 
who is God/ the Ephesine Council also said of its execution 
and promulgation by themselves. Pope and council together 
claim the prerogative of infallibility : the Pope in defining 
the relationship of Nestorius' teaching to the Christian faith, 
the council, in judging after the Pope, 4 necessarily compelled • 
by His Holiness* decision. 

Bossuet, who frequently soars above the mists of Gallican 
prejudices, rightly says 2 that the council was not necessary, 
but it was expedient, on account of the trouble that Nestorius 
was able to create through his influence at court. The council, 
therefore, was careful to note that its decision did not dero- 
gate from the compulsory nature of the Papal decision, but 
presumed it ; it was, though the act of free men, not, in every 
sense, a free action ; it was a matter of duty to join them- 
selves as members to their head, 3 it was their own assertion 

1 avMtiTovpyov. * Def. Decl. Cleri Oallicani. * Mansi, t. iv. p. 1200 o. 




336 



TO THE POPE AS THEIR FATHER. 



aj>. 400 



of their membership in the teaching body. The obligation 
which was thus laid upon them by the canons could only refer 
to Nestorius' disobedience to the synod, which compelled it 
to enter upon the question without his own defence. No canon 
had dealt with his dogmatic error ; but the canons provided 
for the judicial treatment of a heretic. But the letter of 
Celestine, which laid them under this obligation to obedience, 
had respect not only to the deposition of Nestorius, but to his 
heresy, 1 for it provided that his deposition should follow on 
his refusal to retract his error in regard to the matter of faith 
within ten days. And although the Pontiff had left the 
execution of his sentence, including its delay (if deemed ad- 
visable) to the synod, he had not left it open to them to acquit 
Nestorius in the event of his obstinate adherence to his error. 
This obstinacy had now been established by competent wit- 
nesses, and the council, having complied with the provisions 
of the canons in summoning him three times, was ' necessarily 
compelled,' in obedience to the Papal sentence, to depose and 
excommunicate the archbishop. But how, as Ballerini asks, 
could the Ephesine Fathers be ' necessarily compelled 9 by 
the letter of Celestine, unless they were 1 necessarily compelled' 
to preserve a unity of faith with the Roman Pontiff? 

Now, how do those writers deal with this momentous utter- 
ance of the council who maintain the independence of national 
Churches ? 

It is not put in evidence at all by Canon Bright in his 
article in Smith's 1 Dictionary of Christian Biography ' on 
St. Cyril, nor in that by Mr. Ffoulkes on the Council of 
Ephesus ; neither does it appear in Canon Bright's ' History 
of the Church,' where the sentence on Nestorius is thus 
described : ' And the prelates proceeded to depose and excom- 
municate Nestorius in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
whom he has " blasphemed " ' (p. 838). 

There is no allusion to the letter of Celestine here. 

It does not appear in Canon Robertson's ' History of the 
Church ' — a work which has figured much on the list of books 
recommended to candidates for ordination in the Established 

1 Of. Ballerini, De Vi et Batione Primatm Bom. Pontif. o. xiii. § 11. 




—452 



THE JOY AT EPHESUS. 



337 



Church. Dean Milman 1 quotes a part of the sentence, but 
omits the crucial words ' by the letter of our Most Holy Father 
and fellow-minister Celestine.' He even gives the Greek in 
a foot-note, with the same omission, marking that there is an 
omission. Dr. Wordsworth seems to go a step beyond these 
writers. He omits the crucial word ' compelled.' His version 
of the synod's sentence is: 3 'They then declared that in 
accordance with the canons of the Church, and with the letter 
of their Most Holy Father and brother-minister, Celestine, 
bishop of the Roman Church,* &c. 

' In accordance with ' is certainly not an accurate transla- 
tion of ' necessarily compelled by,' nor is it even a fair para- 
phrase of the same. A very strong and exhaustive term is 
here used in the Greek. 8 And not content with a word which 
contains the idea of tremendous force, they add to it the adverb 
' necessarily.' 4 And it must be remembered that the Greek is 
the original here ; that it was drawn up by Easterns, and that 
it was the Greek which the Eastern Fathers actually signed. 

The sentence thus expressed and signed, the Fathers 
issued forth from their oecumenical synod. The citizens of 
Ephesus were in an ecstasy of joy. They had waited for the 
sentence in eager expectation, not as doubting the truth, but 
as looking forward to its confirmation. And upon the 
council's leaving St. Mary's at the close of the day, they burst 
into the wildest applause, and attended the orthodox bishops 
home with every token of honour, Cyril coming in, as well he 
might, for the lion's share of their attention. Torchlight 
processions and incense accompanied the members of the 
synod to their residences, and the very ladies of Ephesus 
turned out to manifest their joy at the vindication of the glory 
of their sex, the ' great Mother of God, Mary most holy.' 

Candidian, the emperor's legate, on the contrary, soon 
had the notices from the city walls torn down. The synod 
had defeated his hopes ; but he was bent on causing trouble, 
as the event proved. Dr. Littledale thinks that he makes a 

1 Hist, of hat. Christianity, vol. i. p. 211 (4th and revised edition). 

* Church History, vol. iv. p. 216. 

* KmwuxMrris, which is a strong form of hruxMms. 

4 IrtryKolus. Cf . St. Irene us on the necessity of agreeing with Borne, p. 86. 



Z 




388 



LEGATES ARRIVE FROM ROME 



a.d. 400 



point against the ' Petrine claims ' of Rome when he adduces 
the fact that ' no practical impression was made on Nestorius 
or the bishops of his party * 1 by the Papal sentence ; and Dr. 
Salmon holds 9 that the mere fact that the decision of a council 
was not received at once on all sides is fatal to the infalli- 
bility of oecumenical councils — an argument which would 
summarily dispose of our Lord's Divinity. One of the most 
recent theories about our Lord's miracles is that since every- 
body did not at once yield assent to His claims, no miracles 
could have been worked ; and Dr. Salmon's is only the same 
argument applied to the Church. Certainly Nestorianism did 
not cease to be ; indeed, it seemed for a moment as though 
after the council's judgment it might gain the upper hand. 
But what of that ? These writers have failed to appreciate 
one of the leading facts of human history, viz. the fall of 
man. Men who could repudiate the truth concerning the In- 
carnation could and did rebel against the Holy See and against 
any number of councils. Nestorius, then, and his followers, 
instead of submitting to Pope or councils, had their weapons 
ready ; and John of Antioch was to be led into serious sin be- 
fore the ultimate triumph of the great Patriarch of Alexandria. 

St. Celestine, foreseeing or being fully acquainted with the 
difficulties of the position, had sent three legates to reinforce 
the council. There is no evidence that St. Cyril knew of 
their near approach. By the time of their arrival the 
emperor's party had sufficiently exerted themselves to prevent 
the further use of St. Mary's by the orthodox bishops, who 
accordingly met in the house of Memnon, the Bishop of 
Ephesus. The Papal legates had instructions from St. 
Celestine not to mix themselves up with any discussions, but 
simply to act as judges and to carry out his sentence. 
Accordingly, in this new session the bishops submitted their 
action in the previous session to the judgment of the legates, 
and asked them to confirm it. Philip, legate of * the Apostolic 
throne/ as the Acts describe him, said, in his opening speech, 
that Celestine had 1 long ago decided ' the present matters by 
his letters, 3 but that he now sends fresh letters for 'the 

1 Tctrine Claims, p. 98. 1 Infallibility of the Church, p. 426, c. 

1 Mansi, t. iv. ool. 1282, b. 



Digitized by 



—452 



WITH A PAPAL BRIEF. 



339 



confirmation of the Catholic Faith.' Cyril proposed that the 
letters of the Pope should be read 1 with the honour that befits 
them.' They were* accordingly read in Latin and Greek, 
Philip having first said that it was in accordance with custom 
that the letters of the Apostolic See should be read first in 
Latin. The Papal letter speaks of the synod as being a 
witness to the presence of the Holy Spirit, and expresses the 
conviction that the same Lord who presided over the Council 
at Jerusalem will be present at Ephesus and teach them. 
All bishops have received the Holy Ghost ; all have received 
a common command to preach the name of the Lord in place 
of the Apostles whom they succeed. He then refers to 
Timothy having been left by St. Paul at Ephesus, and com- 
pares them to Timothy. The Pope's expression suggests a 
similar relationship between himself and the bishops in 
synod to that which existed between St. Paul the Apostle and 
St. Timothy, Bishop of Ephesus. He ends with the assurance 
that they will see that what he has decided concerning 
Nestorius is 'in behalf of the security and freedom from 
trouble of all the Churches,' and that they will therefore not 
hesitate to give in their adhesion to 'what was long ago 
decided by us,' which he has sent his legates to execute. 1 

This letter, on being read, elicited applause from the 
bishops, who, taking up the injunction in the last sentence, 
cried out, ' This is a just decision,' and the synod exclaimed 
that it thanked ' Celestine, a new Paul ' (in allusion to the 
Pope's reference to St. Paul's admonition to Timothy), « Cyril, 
a new Paul ' (Cyril who had represented the Pope), 1 Celestine, 
the guardian of the faith (t£ <f>v\atci tt}? trier ea>$), Celestine of 
one mind with the synod,' 1 one Celestine, one Cyril, one faith 
of the synod, one faith of the whole world.' 

These utterances as to the unity of the Church contain a 
volume of theology, and taken together with what had pre- 
ceded them they exactly illustrate the idea of the Church's 
action in a general council as described above (p. 330.) 

The Pope appears in them as the source of infallibility ; 
the council's action is stated to be the sequence of his ; it is 
an actual exercise of judgment in the shape of an intelligent 



Mansi, t. iy. ool. 1287 r b. 



t 2 




340 



THE BISHOPS' ACCEPTANCE. 



a.d. 400 



adhesion to the Papal sentence ; and the result of all is the 
exhibition of the Church's unity as a whole. 

This, too, is the description of the situation given almost 
in so many words by Projectus, one of the episcopal legates of 
the Pope. He speaks of the two* afforded by Celestine's 
letters, and says that the Pope has exhorted their Holiness, 
not as though teaching the ignorant, but as reminding those 
who know. He applies to Celestine's action the very word, 
when translated into Greek (as it appears in the Acts), which 
Celestine had used of St. Paul when he ' admonished ' Timothy 
as Bishop of Ephesus ; and speaks of their office as being that 
of 1 bringing the matter to a perfect end,' so that their action 
was to be the consummation of the apostolic sentence of the 
Pope. 

Firmus, Bishop of Csesarea in Cappadocia, now answered 
for the council, and his answer is most important. He 
speaks of the ' Apostolic and holy throne' having given the 
' decision and sentence ' 1 in the affair of Nestorius, to 
Alexandria, Jerusalem, Thessalonica, Constantinople, and 
Antioch, which (he says) we, the bishops of the synod, have 
followed. 9 He says that the limit of time allowed to Nestorius 
by Celestine for reformation had long passed when they reached 
Ephesus ; that the emperor had fixed the time for their meet- 
ing; that they had summoned Nestorius and he had not 
obeyed their summons, and that accordingly they had executed 
the sentence (toi/ riirov ige/3i/3d<rafi€v) by passing a canonical 
and apostolical judgment against him. Canonical, he doubt- 
less meant in allusion to the terms of the sentence ' necessarily 
compelled by the canons ; ' ' apostolical ' in allusion to the 
letter of their Holy Father Celestine, by which also they were 
' compelled.' 

After this clear description of the situation, Arcadius, the 
third legate, thanking God for their arrival on the scene, asks 
that the proceedings of the council be read. Philip the legate 
asks the same, in accordance with Celestine's injunctions, 
congratulating the holy and venerable synod that they have 
' joined themselves as holy members to the holy head by their 
holy exclamations ' — again a perfect description of the office of 

1 +7j<pou ku\ rfaov. Mansi, U iv. col. 1290. a f &KQ\ov04i<rturrcs jc. t. X. 




—452 



THE SCHISMATIC SYNOD 



341 



a general council as given above by Fenelon, 4 Their submission 
was a judgment and their judgment was submission/ Philip 
asks for the proceedings of the synod previous to the arrival of 
the legates to be shown that they may confirm them. Theo- 
dotus, Bishop of Ancyra, remarks that : 

' The God of all has shown that the sentence of the synod 
is just by the auspicious arrival 1 of the letters of the Godfear- 
ing bishop Celestine, and by the presence of your Piety/ 

And the legates retired that night to their residence with 
the Acts of the first session, to peruse them in quiet. 

IV. Meanwhile, 2 John of Antioch had arrived with a follow- 
ing of several disreputable and disqualified bishops, together 
with a few others who would naturally have formed part of the 
synod. The former were men who lay under accusation of 
various kinds, some of them not having dioceses in consequence 
of misconduct. This description of them is given by the whole 
orthodox synod, again and again, even to the emperor him- 
self. Strange to say, some writers prefer the statement of 
these men to the account given by the orthodox bishops of the 
council. Yet the latter were, according to St. Vincent of 
Lerins, 8 men of peculiar ability and holiness ; and they were 
on the side of divine truth, engaged in a struggle for the truth 
of the Incarnation. It is infinitely to the credit of Dr. Pusey 
that he should have set himself against the stream of Anglican 
writers on this point. He stands, we believe, alone in defend- 
ing St. Cyril against the accusation of impatience and in giving 
the same account of John of Antioch's delay as the synod 
itself gives. In opposition to Canon Bright's argument 4 that 
John of Antioch would have wished to be there at Ephesus 
before the arrival of the legates (which supposes that he wished 
to be there at all, and that he knew of the approach of the 
legates — both of them gratuitous assumptions), Dr. Pusey 



1 bruponliff* i— a word whioh is generally used of the arrival of a messenger 
from God, especially of the Holy Spirit Cf. Dindorf , Steph. Thesaur. vol. iii. 
p. 1881. 

* The second session of the council was on July 10. John of Antioch 
reached Ephesus on June 27, and held the Conciliabulum the same day. 

* Commonit. i. 42. 

4 Hist, of the Church, p. 331, adopted also by Neale, Hist, of E. Church, bk. 
i. § 2, originally suggested by Tillemont* 




342 



UNDER THE PATRIARCH 



a.d. 400 



maintains 1 that John of Antioch might easily have arrived in 
time, and that there is no conceivable motive for his delay, 
except what the synod gives on information which it had re- 
ceived from adequate sources. ' Why should he delay/ asks 
Dr. Pusey, ' except that he did not wish to be there ? ' 

The passage in Evagrius on which Dr. Blight relies, both in 
his ' History ' and in his more recent article in the ' Dictionary 
of Christian Biography/ is not sufficient to settle the question. 
Evagrius was an Antiochene, if not by birth at least by resi- 
dence, and he merely gives the fact that many, doubtless 
Antiochenes also, thought there was excuse for John : and the 
reading of the passage is not certain. And Evagrius is cer- 
tainly inaccurate in the same passage in saying that Cyril 
asked Theodosius to convene the council, as also in another 
statement, that Nestorius promised to attend the synod on the 
first summons. 

Hefele's account, according to which John of Antioch's 
message that they should proceed without him, refers to the 
time of the reception of his message, and not to a time subse- 
quent to that, is in strict accordance with the only evidence we 
have; and accordingly, the Protestant editor of Clarke's trans- 
lation of Hefele's work says in his Preface 2 with regard to 
Cyril, that 4 there seems no reason to doubt that his antago- 
nists purposely delayed their arrival, and gave him to under- 
stand that the proceedings might begin. At any rate, the 
author [viz. Bishop Hefele] appears to have stated the case 
with all possible accuracy.' 

On his arrival at Ephesus, John of Antioch, refusing to 
listen to the deputation of orthodox bishops, which endeavoured 
to provide him with proper information, proceeded in the ut- 
most haste to hold a synod of these otherwise unsatisfactory 
bishops, and after listening to an ex parte and most untruthful 
statement from Count Candidian, deposed and excommuni- 
cated Cyril and Memnon. 

The turmoil in Ephesus can be better imagined than 
described. John did not, indeed, express sympathy with the 
teaching of Nestorius, but he professed to discern a fatal flaw 

1 Cf. Cyril of Alex. Tomes against Nestorius, Preface, p. lxxx. 

* Preface to Hefele's Hist of the Council, English translation, p. viii. 




—462 



OF ANTIOCH. 



343 



in the mode of his deposition by the council, as being contrary 
both to the imperial rescript and to the canons. It is needless 
to say that he paid no manner of attention to either of these 
authorities in his own proceedings. He was completely led 
away by the disquiet spirits who had gathered round him, 
some of whom had been deposed by Borne, and others were 
under accusation for various charges; although he would 
probably have said that he was not setting himself up against 
the Pope, but had only taken the part of a man who, although 
teaching falsely, was being persecuted by Cyril and his 
associates. Fortunately he was prevented from consecrating 
another bishop in place of Memnon at Ephesus, as he was 
minded to do. 




CHAPTER XX. 



THE 8EB OP PETER ' CONFIRMING THE BRETHREN.' 

L Such was the state of things when the true council re- 
assembled to hear the judgment of the Papal legates as to the 
execution of the Papal sentence at their first session, whose 
minutes the legates had now perused at home. 

Philip takes the foremost place, and at once declares that 
the judgment of the synod in its first session had been passed 
on thoroughly canonical and ecclesiastical lines ; and he asks 
that the minutes be read over again publicly, in order that, 
' following the sentence of the most holy Pope Celestine, who 
undertook this care [i.e. the care of this matter], we may be 
able to confirm the decisions of your Holiness.' 

Arcadius seconds Philip's proposal, and the sentence of the 
synod was read again, containing the crucial words 1 compelled 
of necessity by the canons and by the letter of our Holy Father 
and brother-minister Celestine,' <fcc. Then it was that Philip 
rose and pronounced the definite judgment on the proceedings 
of the council as it sat, with Cyril at its head, and listened to 
the most elaborate and careful statement of the relation of the 
Holy See to the rest of the Catholic Church. 

His words are too important to be given in paraphrase 
only. He says : 1 1 It is doubtful to no one, but rather has 
been known to all ages, that the holy and most blessed Peter, 
the prince and head of the Apostles, and pillar of the faith, 
the foundation of the Catholic Church, received of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, the' Saviour and Redeemer of the human race, 
the keys of the kingdom, and power was given to him to bind 



1 Mansi, t. iv. ooL 1295. 




a.i>. 400-462 PAPAL SUPREMACY 



345 



and loose sins ; who, up to this time and always lives and 
exercises judgment in his successors. In accordance, therefore, 
with this order, his successor holding his place, our holy and 
most blessed Father Gelestine has sent us to this synod to 
supply his presence.' 

He proceeds to say that all having been done regularly, 
and Nestorius having refused to attend the synod, what has 
been pronounced against him is ' firm/ holds good, according 
to the decision of all the Churches, for East and West are 
present together at this ' sacerdotal assembly.' So let Nes- 
torius know that he is outside the communion of the Catholic 
Church. 

Arcadius followed in the same strain. His points were 
that Nestorius had been admonished 1 by the letters of the 
Apostolic See,' and then also by the synod ; that he had not 
made use of the time accorded to him for coming round to a 
better mind ; that he had not accepted the sentence of the 
Apostolic See (tvttov rrjs airoo-Tokucrjs /caOiBpas) nor the ad- 
monition of all the holy bishops ; consequently, in obedience 1 
to the decisions delivered by Celestine, the most holy Pope of 
the Apostolic See, and to the decrees of the holy synod (we 
say), let Nestorius know that he has been deprived 2 of the 
episcopal dignity, and is excluded from the whole Catholic 
Church and the communion of all the bishops. 

Projectus says that on the same grounds he decides with 
the authority of a 1 commission from the holy Apostolic See, 
as executor, in fellowship with his brethren, of the sentence,' 
that Nestorius is forthwith bereft of the honour of the episco- 
pate and of communion with the orthodox bishops. 

II. Such is the position which was occupied by the Papal 
legates. There can be no mistake about the significance of 
their utterances. It is not possible to express the position of 
Rome in the Catholic Church in plainer terms. Her position, 
according to these statements, is that of judge in matters of 
faith, and of ruler in matters of discipline. That position is 
traced to a divine institution. She is asserted to be the See of 

1 iuco\ov$4i<ravrtf, which is opposed to the non-acceptance or disobedience of 
Nestorius. 

* It is the Greek perfect, indicating the still enduring result of a past act. 



Digitized by Google 



346 



ASSERTED AND ACCEPTED 



a.d. 400 



St. Peter, and as such, by reason of the position of princedom 
bestowed on him by our Divine Lord, she is proclaimed the 
head of the Catholic Church. As such she has responded to 
St. Cyril's request, rvir&aai to Sokovv, that she would formulate 
the dogmatic sentence. The synod has followed that sentence, 
and therefore the legates, in the name of Celestine, the occu- 
pant of the Apostolic See, are prepared to confirm the act of 
the synod. This is the pith of the legates' speeches. 

Now if this position was quietly accepted, we have at 
an oecumenical council an emphatic condemnation of the 
Anglican position as contradicting and rebelling against thai 
form of unity which Christ established in His Church. If the 
Anglican position is to be defended on the ground of conformity 
with the principles of Church life that have the sanction of the 
oecumenical councils, history must record some protest against 
the position taken up by the legates at the Council of Ephesus* 
Anglicans proudly turn to history. No words can be more 
scathing than those in which Canon Carter 1 and Mr. Gore, for 
instance, denounce what they are pleased to call Roman 
Catholic disregard for history, and assert their own superior 
attention to its verdict. Bishop King, of Lincoln, follows 
suit. 8 And yet the Anglican Church takes its stand, as did the 
Lambeth Conference, 3 on the first four oecumenical councils. 
Well, we open the Acts of the Councils, and what do we find ? 
Here at Ephesus is the teaching of the Catholic Roman Church 
described in full, and we look in vain for any protest, any 
one dissentient voice, any sign whatever of disagreement. 4 
On the contrary, Cyril forthwith appeals to the synod, saying 
that the bishops have heard what the legates have said, that 
the legates have spoken as ' occupying the place of the Apo- 
stolic See, and of all the holy synod of God-beloved and most 

1 Cf. Roman Question, chapter on * Ideas of Truth ; ' and Gore's B, C. Claims, 
p. 109, 2nd edition. 

* Preface to Primitive Saints, dc, passim. 

• Dr. Salmon repudiates the authority of the councils to such an extent that r 
although his book is used by High Churchmen, its theory is not the same as 
that of the Lambeth Conference of the Anglican Episcopate. 

4 Mr. Puller (Primitive Saints, p. 184) calls the doctrine of Philip at 
Ephesus 1 new and therefore false ; • the council accepts it as old and therefore 
true. What Philip said was ' suitable.' 




—452 



BY ALL THE BISHOPS. 



347 



holy bishops in the West ; ' that they have executed what has 
been prescribed to them by Celestine ; that they have given 
their approval to the sentence of the holy synod against 
Nestorius, and that consequently they should be asked to set 
their signature to the same, and that the records of what was 
done yesterday and to-day should be added to the previous 
Acts. 

The whole council responds to Cyril's proposal, and says, 
• Since Arcadius and Projectus, the reverend and pious bishops 
and legates, and Philip, presbyter and legate of the Apostolic 
See, have spoken what is suitable, they ought to confirm the 
Acts by their signature.' 1 

It is enough. We ought to hear nothing about ' history ' 
from those who refuse to obey the See of St. Peter on the 
ground that it is not the divinely appointed centre of unity to 
the Catholic Church. We ought, at least, to hear no such 
accusations as to Rome's disregard for history as are indulged 
in by some writers, whose position is absolutely excluded 
by the history of the Council of Ephesus. We ought to hear 
no more of the theory that the teaching of the Church of Borne 
is only a continuation of 4 a school of thought,' as Mr. Gore 
holds, or of an ' innovation of the Church's laws,' as Dr. Little- 
dale held, due to the powerful character of St. Leo the Great. 
The Council of Ephesus was held twenty years before the 
Council of Chalcedon ; and at the Council of Ephesus the 
theory of the Church's government which these writers persist 
in calling an innovation was in full working order, and was 
declared to be based on a truth acknowledged ' by all ages.' 
The teaching of the Vatican decree on this subject was the 
teaching of the Fathers of Ephesus, and it was the rule of 
their conduct. Consider the whole drama of the council's 
decision. Commencing with some hesitation, considering the 
difficult circumstances in which they were placed, the Fathers 
of the council rise to the occasion, and, amid many tears, as 
they say, pass their sentence in accordance with, and in obe- 
dience to that of the See of St. Peter. They have the emperor 
against them ; they presently have the patriarch of one of the 
three Petrine Sees against them ; they have troops of soldiers 



1 Mansi, t. iv. col. 1299. 




if 



T 



348 



THE SYNOD TO THE EMPEROR. 



A.D. 400 



i 

f 




brought from Lydia against them, and peasants from the 
worst parts of Constantinople, creating a scene of confusion, 
and stirring up the indignation of the inhabitants of the city, 
who were all, nevertheless, on the side of Cyril and the ortho- 
dox bishops ; but in the face of all this turmoil, the synod 
calmly and judiciously enters upon the work for which it had 
been convoked by the emperor, and which had been entrusted 
to its care (as itself says) by the ' Holy Apostolic See.' And 
now, reinforced by legates from the Apostolic throne, the whole 
tone of the synod rises, and with mutual congratulations, the 
entire body — ' the holy members joining themselves to their 
holy head, not being ignorant [as Philip says] that the blessed 
Apostle Peter is the head of the whole affair, and even of the 
Apostles ' — exhibits its perfect unity in the condemnation and 
extrusion of the heretic from communion with itself. The 
bishops had written to the emperor immediately after the first 
session, but now they write again in bolder terms, informing 
him that Celestine had indicated the line of judgment which 
they too had adopted, that he had sent Cyril to hold his place 
— a direct reversal of the imperial wish — and that he now 
afresh signified the same mind, having sent letters by his 
legates, Arcadius, Projectus and Philip. These men (they 
say) expressed the mind of the entire West, and have declared 
their oneness with the synod, so that ' the whole world is of 
one mind.' The synod thereupon ventures a step further, 
and requests the emperor not to disturb them any more 
with * sacra jussiones ' in Nestorius' behalf, and they ask 
to be released, that they may return to their various 
homes. 

Now it will naturally be asked, How do Anglican writers 
deal with the crucial words which fell from Philip's lips ? 

We have failed to find them in full in any Anglican writer. 1 
No one of those from whose writings we have quoted has 

1 Sinoe the above was written a book has appeared called Leadership, not 
Lordship^ in which these words are given ; but they are accompanied by a mis- 
statement of the facts. The writer speaks of the words of Philip having been 
only 1 accepted in the sense of not being contradicted in words,' which is not 
true ; and he speaks, in the same sentence, of the ' absolutely independent [sic] 
judgment and action of the council. 1 This is in simple defiance of the 
council's own words—' necessarily compelled,' Ac. 





—452 



COMMENTS. 



349 



given bis readers the benefit of Philip's speech in fall. Neither 
does any one of them connect it' rightly with its context. 
Dr. Littledale alludes to it only to pass it by as the private 
opinion of the Papal legate. But this, as we have seen, is 
not true. It does not occur in Dr. Wordsworth's rather full 
account of the council, nor in Dean Milman's. Dr. Neale 
says simply, ' the legate Philip, after dwelling on the primacy 
[sic] of St. Peter's chair,' &C. 1 Dr. Bright is the only Anglican 
writer of prominence that has dealt with Philip's words, of 
which his account is as follows: 3 'Next day, in the third 
session, the legate Philip, having magnified the successor of 
Peter as inheriting his authority, joined with his two com- 
panions in affirming the sentence against Nestorius.' 

This is a somewhat meagre summary of this all-important 
session ; but in a note Dr. Bright gives a short quotation from 
the said speech with comments : ' Peter (said Philip) was the 
head of the Apostles, and " even now and always 8 lives and 
judges in his successors." On the whole, what Borne said in 
481 amounts to this : " Ail bishops succeed the Apostles, but 
Gelestine, as heir of him who was the foremost Apostle, 
has a right to be foremost among bishops." Borne did not 
say, as she now practically says, " The apostolic authority is 
concentrated in St. Peter's successor." There is nothing 
strange in Celestine's charge to the legates to maintain the 
authority of Borne.' 

What Dr. Bright's explanation does not meet is the asser- 
tion that the primacy of the successor of Peter is, according 
to Philip and the council, of divine institution; and that, 
taking into account the context of the words, they indicate a 
belief that the apostolic authority of the Church cannot be 
exercised in antagonism to the judgment of the 'Apostolic 
throne.' We must repeat, and it cannot be too often re- 
peated, that the Vatican decree does not teach that the action 
or judgment of the ' Holy Apostolic See ' exhausts the exercise 

1 History of the Eastern Church, bk. ii. § ii. The word * primacy,' amongst 
Anglicans, generally means something less than supremacy. In Catholic ter- 
minology the two are identical. 

• History of the Church, p. 836. 

' Flenry and Ceillier omit the word * always/ although there is no difference 
in the original. 




350 



CYRIL PROTESTS AGAINST 



a.d. 400 



of apostolic authority in the Church, but that it informs it, 
to use a scholastic term; it does not exclude the apostolic 
authority of the episcopate, but is necessary to it ; it is not 
the act of the whole Church, but of the Head of the Church. 
Only it is involved in the promises of her Divine Head, that 
the earthly Head, His vicar, shall not lead the members astray, 
and that there shall never be separation between the Head 
and members : that is to say, the Church shall never die. 
The members, by their separation, cease to be living members. 
The Holy Apostolic See will live on till the day of doom with 
such members as He alone knows will be joined to their Head, 
for the gates of hell shall not prevail against her. 1 

III. In the next session of the synod, Cyril, still presiding, 
brought forward his own case and that of Memnon, the Bishop 
of Ephesus. John of Antioch had allowed himself to be so 
far led away by the bad company in which he found himself, 
that he had synodically condemned, excommunicated, and 
deposed both Cyril and Memnon. Cyril could afford to treat 
such madness with contempt. But he had to deal with an 
emperor who was opposed to him, and with future generations. 
He might have fallen back simply and solely on his union 
with the successor of St. Peter ; but the matter was one which 
had arisen since his communication with Celestine. Accounts 
were already being sent to the emperor by Candidian ; and 
Nestorius and the Patriarch of Antioch both leant on the 
imperial arm. At any moment he might find himself in 
prison, as, indeed, soon actually happened. Every moment, 
therefore, was of importance. 

Accordingly the synod met again, and Cyril asked the 
bishops for their vote on John of Antioch's conduct towards 
himself and Memnon. In stating their cases he gives a short 
summary of what had happened, in which precisely the same 

1 Mr. Poller (Prim, Saints, p. 184), quoting part of Philip's words, adds, 
4 We must certainly say that all this is new doctrine : new and therefore false ; 
an attempt to give a religious sanction to the great position which the Roman 
Pontiffs had acquired mainly through the legislative action of the State.' It 
has been shown above that Mr. Puller's proofs of the * legislative' origin of the 
position of the Holy Sec are derived from misinterpretations of the documents. 
Here he is face to face with all these Eastern bishops, and what he says was new 
teaching, they say was the original and universal teaching of the. Church. 




—452 



ANTIOCH, A LESSER THRONE, 



351 



view of matters as I have emphasised recurs. They had 
met, he says, in consequence of the imperial edict — but for 
what purpose ? * For the purpose of confirming by a common 
sentence the right definition of the Apostolic Faith' — this, 
and not the settlement of an open question, was the primary 
object of the council. The opo?, or definition, was, of course, 
the opurOima rxmov of the Apostolic See. Their confirmation 
of this was not the act of a superior authority, for they also 
confirmed the Nicene Creed, and their very confirmation was 
submitted to the judgment of the Papal legates, but it was 
the added strength, as we have already seen, of the exhibition 
of unity on the part of the assembled bishops. It was the 
various points of the circumference (to use Father Bottalla's 
simile) cleaving to their centre ; ' following ' (as Bishop Fir- 
mus, publicly, interpreted the council's action) ' the sentence 
of the Apostolic throne,' i urged of necessity,' as the council 
at large expressed themselves, 'by the canons and by the 
letter of Celestine,' and in performing their duty the mem- 
bers of the council had proved the heresy recently introduced 
by Nestorius. So that the purpose of the council was 'to 
confirm by a common sentence the orthodox decision of the 
Apostolic Faith, and to attest the heresy recently introduced 
by Nestorius.' After explaining how the proceedings had 
been conducted in an orderly and judicial manner, and how 
John of Antioch had delayed when he might have come, and 
had brought with him, and been joined by, certain disorderly 
people, some without sees, some under accusations, he points 
out that the so-called sentence of deposition which John and 
some thirty bishops had pretended to pass on himself and 
Memnon was absurd, considering the number and character 
of the real synod. Further, the Patriarch of Antioch had 
violated a rule of the Church in attempting such a thing as 
the deposition of one occupying ' a greater throne.' That is 
to say, Antioch had no jurisdiction over Alexandria. Even 
if it had, the canons of the Church should have been observed, 
by their citing the accused to appear before them. Such was 
St. Cyril's view of the position. 

Accordingly, on CyriTs proposition, three bishops were 
now sent to John of Antioch to summon him to appear before 




352 



JUDGING ALEXANDRIA. 



A.D. 400 



the synod. But they found John surrounded with soldiers, 
and were insulted with the blasphemous talk of his retinue. 
On the return of the episcopal messengers, Cyril proposed 
that the synod should at once proceed to declare the sentence 
of the Conciliabulum null and void. But Juvenal, Bishop of 
Jerusalem, interposed, suggesting that John should be cited 
again. In the course of his speech Juvenal roundly con- 
demned the Patriarch of Antioch for not hastening to appear 
before the holy synod to defend himself before it, 'and to 
obey and respect the Apostolic throne of great Borne, sitting 
with us. 9 The rest of the sentence is untranslatable as it 
stands. 1 It appears to bring in also ' the Apostolic throne of 
Jerusalem.' But Juvenal could hardly have spoken of that 
as ' sitting with us,' for it was himself. He proceeds, accord- 
ing to the text, to speak of the throne of Borne as being that 
see ' by which, or at which, above all it is the custom by 
apostolic order and tradition for the throne of Antioch itself 
to be directed and judged.' It has been thought that Juvenal 
may have alluded to his own see, because he was, as a matter 
of fact, at that time endeavouring to wrest some of her fairest 
provinces from Antioch; and at the Latrocinium shortly 
afterwards he did take his seat as above Antioch, and sided 
with Eutyches. But it is impossible that he should have 
claimed in the council at this time what was so manifestly 
false, and what was actually true of the Apostolic throne of 
Borne, in several previous cases, such as that of Paulinus of 
Antioch. He obviously insisted on the same point as St. Cyril 
did, viz. that only Borne possessed jurisdiction over the throve 
of Alexandria, and in some way at the same time magnified 
the greatness of his own see. John was twice more cited, 
but with similar and even worse results, the bishops being 
ignominiously treated, John saying that ' since the causes of 
the court are transferred to the Church, he was transferring 
the cause of the Church to the court.' 

The synod thereupon proceeded on the following day to 
pronounce all that John of Antioch had done null and void, 
and to pass sentence of excommunication against him and his 
associates, until they should acknowledge their fault, adding 



1 Labbe,t.iii. p. 1172. 




-452 



JUDGMENT LEFT TO ROME. 



353 



that 1 unless they do that quickly, they will undergo the com- 
plete sentence of the canon.' In this session there is no 
mention of Cyril having presided as in the previous one, 
possibly because in the condemnation of John of Antioch Cyril 
was going beyond his original commission, and therefore the 
Papal legates act alone, their commission by Celestine's ex- 
press words having a further reach, and including such a step 
as the deposition of the Bishop of Antioch, although by the 
same commission they were empowered to act as they did in 
conjunction with Cyril and with his advice. The synod, thus 
composed of the Papal legates with so wide a commission as 
Celestine gave them, might have proceeded to depose John of 
Antioch as he had pretended to depose Cyril and Memnon. 
In their letter to St. Celestine they expressly say they might 
have done so, but they stopped short of this and ' reserved it 
for the judgment of your Holiness/ 1 Being a matter con- 
cerning one of the 'greater thrones,' they left the severer 
sentence for the Apostolic throne itself, the See of St. Peter, 
whose care for the Faith they had pronounced in the begin- 
ning of their letter to be worthy of all admiration, and to 
which they said they had written a report as a matter of duty 
and necessity (ixPV v amavra els yp&aw rrjs affs oo-iottjtos 
av6ve)(0T)vai rh Trapa/coXovffqa-avra ypd<f>ofiev avay/caieos). 

This letter of the synod is of the utmost importance as a 
defence of Cyril in beginning the synod without John, and as 
giving the view of the oecumenical council itself as to its own 
claim to be such, in contrast with the miserable meetings over 
which the Patriarch of Antioch presided. It says that the 
council was one gathered from the whole world, since ' it con- 
tained your Holiness' representatives, Arcadius, Projectus 
and Philip, who secured to us the grace of your presence by 
their own, and supplied the place of the Apostolic See,' 2 which 
is exactly the teaching of the Catholic Boman Church at this 
hour. They also speak of the harm that would come to 
the Church * if the greater sees were to be insulted with im- 
punity, and sentence were to be pronounced upon them by 
those who have no jurisdiction over them.' As we have seen, 
they hold that they, including as they did the representatives 



1 Mansi, t. iv. p. 1830. 



* Ibid. p. 1338. 



A A 




354 



CELESTINE'S LAST LETTER 



A.D. 400 



of the Holy See, had jurisdiction over one of the 1 greater 
thrones,' although, as a matter of fact, they reserved the 
actual exercise for Celestine himself. They further speak of 
Cyril as having been the mainstay of the Faith, and conclude 
with saying that * they have judged that all that has been 
decided by His Holiness concerning the Pelagians and Celes- 
tians, concerning Pelagius and Gelestius and Julian, <fec.,' 
should stand firm, and that they accept the depositions by 
the Holy See, after reading the letters which His Holiness 
had sent concerning them. 

The story, interesting as it is, of the final acceptance of 
the deposition of Nestorius by John of Antioch, does not 
belong to my subject. Passing over this, therefore, I shall 
conclude with one or two points that are of importance. 

IV, Celestine before his death wrote one of his most 
touching letters to the bishops of the synod, 1 after their dis- 
persion to their homes, full, as all his letters are, of beautiful 
applications of Holy Scripture, and displaying the firmness of 
a ruler and tenderness of a father. He strikes the note of 
joy in the opening sentence ; he then congratulates them on 
having faithfully carried this affair into execution ' with us ; ' 
he applies to himself the words of the Psalmist (Psal. xxiv.), 
* The innocent and the upright have adhered to me,' showing 
that he conceived of the synod as the synod conceived of 
itself, as the executors of his own sentence. He praises their 
choice of a successor to Nestorius, and congratulates them on 
the emperor's assent. He then tells them that they must not 
stop here, they must induce the emperor to rescind his decree 
about Nestorius being allowed to go to Antioch. He must be 
removed further. 4 Solitude alone becomes such men.' 

' We,' says the Pope, ' are further off than you are, but by 
solicitude we see the whole matter closer. The care of the 
blessed Apostle Peter has the effect of making all present ; we 
canot excuse ourselves before God concerning what we 
know. . . . We ought to have care for all in general, but it 
behoves us specially to assist the Antiochenes, who are 
besieged by pestiferous disease.' 

Such is the care which he evinces for them, in accordance 



1 Ep. Cel. ad Syn. March 15, a.d. 432. 




—452 



ON THE WHOLE MATTER. 



355 



with the title accorded to him by the synod, viz. ' our most 
holy Father/ and with his own conception of his relationship 
to the Prince of the Apostles. He then decides what shall be 
done with respect to those who seemed to think with Nestorius. 
Although the synod had passed sentence on them, ' still we 
also decide what seems best. Many things have to be looked 
into in such cases, which the Apostolic See has always re- 
garded.' He accordingly orders that they shall be dealt with 
in the same way as the ' Celestians,' and desires that the same 
method of treatment shall also be observed in regard to those 
who have imagined that ecclesiastical cases could be removed 
to Christian princes. He then instructs them how John of 
Antioch should be dealt with in case of his correcting himself. 

The letter is that of no usurper ; no spark of ambition 
appears in it. It is that of a God-fearing man providing as 
father for the wants of his children. There is not a trace of 
any consciousness that he is doing anything but fulfilling the 
duties of an office recognised by all ; and that office is the 
government of the universal Church entrusted to him as the 
successor of Peter. On the same day he writes to the emperor 
a letter congratulating him on his better mind, and giving 
him some exquisite exhortations as to the performance of his 
high functions. And he writes also to the clergy and people 
of Constantinople, praising Cyril and drawing attention to 
Nestorius' sleepless energy. But Borne (he adds) is not behind- 
hand in watchfulness. ' The blessed Apostle Peter did not 
desert them when they were toiling so heavily, for, when the 
separation of such an ulcer [as Nestorius] from the ecclesias- 
tical body seemed advisable by reason of the putrid decay 
which became sensible to all, we offered soothing fomentation 
together with the steel. It was not by the swiftness of our 
sentence that he became to us as a publican and heathen man. 
We could not delay longer lest we should seem to run with the 
thief, and to take our portion with the adulterer against faith.' 
He treats his own sentence and its execution by the council 
as all one. 

It is difficult to understand how Bishop Wordsworth could 
call St. Celestine a ' calm spectator of the controversy.' It is 
not less difficult, after all we have seen, to understand how 



A A 2 




356 



THE CYPRIAN DISPUTE 



a.d. 400 



Dr. Salmon could say that ' the only one of the great con- 
troversies in which the Pope really did his part in teaching 
Christians what to believe was the Eutychian controversy/ 1 

Sixtus succeeded Celestine, and took up the work in the 
same spirit. In the following year he wrote to Cyril, praising 
him for his magnificent conduct and directing what was to be 
done about the followers of John of Antioch, and eventually 
wrote a most beautiful letter to John himself after the recon- 
ciliation between him and Cyril, in which he did not spare the 
patriarch for his past conduct, although he acquitted him of 
any heretical teaching. He summed up the whole matter, 
saying, ' You have learned by experience what it is to think 
with us.' 

V. We are now in a position to estimate the force of a 
remark in Dr. Bright's history which, since he has repeated 
it in his latest productions, he appears to consider of some 
importance. 

A case had arisen in the Patriarchate of Antioch which was 
brought before the bishops of the council, and which they 
dealt with not very satisfactorily. It was not one of the 
matters for which they were assembled, and their ' canon ' 
did not rank with their decision as to the affair of Nestorius.* 
The case was this. 

The Cyprians had long endeavoured to establish for them- 
selves an autocephalous position, not, indeed, with no depend- 
ence on anyone, for they would anyhow be subject in some 
matters to the See of St. Peter, but autocephalous in the sense 
of not depending on any neighbouring province for the ordina- 
tion of their metropolitans. In point of fact, numerous pro- 
vinces of the East had from the earliest times 3 been subjected 
to the Patriarch of Antioch, of which Cyprus was one. It had 
remained so until the Council of Nice, and its subordination 
to Antioch was included in the sixth canon of the council. 
During the Eustathian schism at Antioch this order had 
been disturbed by the Arians, and on the termination of the 
schism, Innocent I. had written 4 to the Patriarch of Antioch, 



1 In/all. of the Churchy p. 426, 2nd edition. 

* It is not included in the collection of Dionysiua Exiguus. 

• Nic. Can. vi. 4 Innoc. Ep. xviii. c. 2. 




—452 



WRONGLY DECIDED. 



357 



saying that the Cyprians ought to return to their obedience in 
accordance with the Nicene canons. The Cyprians, however, 
managed to evade the decision of the Holy See, and they now 
succeeded in stealing a march on the Bishop of Antioch under 
cover of his disgrace. The bishops at Ephesus, guarding their 
decision with an ' if,' waiving, that is, the question of the 
truth of the Cyprians' representations, not being able to hear 
the other side from John of Antioch, decreed that supposing 
the Cyprians to be correct in their facts, they were not to be 
subjected to the throne of Antioch. They had not, if their 
statement was correct, belonged to Antioch in the old times ; 
it was not right, therefore, for Antioch to claim jurisdiction 
over them now. The decision was subsequently reversed, and 
the Cyprians eventually agreed to submit to their metropo- 
litans being ordained by the Bishop of Antioch. 1 The fact 
was, as Dr. Neale says, ' that the claims of Antioch in this in- 
stance were well founded.' 2 

In this unfortunate decision the bishops appealed to the 
canons as forbidding any bishop to seize upon, or occupy by 
force, another province which was not previously under his 
own or his predecessor's jurisdiction. This Canon of Ephesus, 
if it can be called such (for it was rather a provision for the 
Cyprian dispute which was afterwards recalled), is one of the 
armouries from which Anglican writers derive one of their 
most curious weapons against Borne. They apply it to the 
action of Gregory the Great in sending St. Augustine to be 
over the British bishops. These bishops were not, so they 
argue, originally under Augustine. They could not therefore 
by right be subjected to him by the Holy See. But apart from 
the universal supremacy of the Apostolic See, there is the 
question whether they were not already under the Bishop of 

1 For a complete misrepresentation of this whole matter see Poller's Prim. 
Saints, p. 181. One would imagine, from this writer's statement (' the Church 
of Cyprus remains autocephalous to this day ') that Cyprus had never returned 
to its position of dependenoe on Antioch. Mr. Puller seems also to forget that 
the ' Council of Ephesus ' included the Papal legates. But this decision was 
probably arrived at after their withdrawal, and so was merely a provisional 
arrangement (pending further inquiry) by which they succeeded in removing 
Cyprus from the influence of John. 

■ Hist, of the E. Church, p. 267. 




358 



ALLUSION TO THE POPE 



a.d. 400 



Borne as Patriarch of the West, in which case the Ephesine 
decision as to the 1 jus Cyprium ' would not apply. Certain 
it is that this decision was never applied to the case of the 
British bishops until the sixteenth century. No one ever 
supposed that Gregory the Great had not the right to define 
the relationship of the bishops in England to the See of 
Canterbury. Again and again the Church of England has 
referred to that Pontiff's action in this matter as natural and 
proper, and even in the hottest dispute between Canterbury 
and York, when Lanfranc at the Council of Windsor pleaded 
the action of Gregory the Great, it did not occur to the Arch- 
bishop of York to call in question that Pontiffs right, or to use 
such an expression as Dr. Bright does in reference to it, viz. 
that of 4 pretension.' 

But the Council of Ephesus, in decreeing, at a time of 
irritation with Antioch, that it would not be well to disturb 
the imaginary ancient arrangement with regard to Cyprus, 
used an expression which Dr. Bright thinks was aimed at 
Borne. He makes a great deal of this supposed allusion, which 
is contained in the mere fact that they used the words 
' worldly pride.' This expression, he thinks, must contain a 
covert allusion to Borne ; and a mere allusion of such a kind 
occurring in an utterance of an oecumenical council is evidently 
held to be of the greatest importance in indicating the mind 
of the Church as to the Holy See. It is alluded to in his 
'History of the Church' (I860), 1 and it reappear, after 
twenty-two years, at great length in his ' Notes on the Canons 
of the first four General Councils.' 2 In deciding that the 
Cyprians should, if their statement of the case was correct, 
have the advantage of the Nicene Canon which forbade the 
bishop of one province to seize by force upon the spiritual 
jurisdiction of another, the bishops at Ephesus used the words 
' secular pride.' Now it happens that the words ' pride of the 
world,' with another epithet, occur in the letter addressed a 
few years before to Celestine, purporting to be from a council 
of all Africa, in which the applicants 'earnestly entreat' 
('impendio deprecamur ') the Pope not to send any more legates 
to execute his orders. They do not, as has been pointed out 



• P. 339, note m. 



* Pp. 119-20-21 (1S82). 




—452 



IMAGINARY. 



359 



above (p. 801), dream of asking him not to issue his orders ; 
but they would rather not have them executed by a legate, 
after their bitter experience of Faustinus. They complain 
that the presence pf 1 executores ' — i.e. legates to execute the 
Papal orders— leads them to pomp and worldly pride ; so they 
entreat the Pope to send them no more legates ' lest we should 
seem to introduce the smoky pride of the world into the Church 
of Christ '— i.e. lest we Christians in Africa should belie our 
calling to be not of this world. 

Seeing, then, that this same word 1 pride ' occurs in the 
Ephesine decree about Cyprus, by which the bishops favoured 
the Cyprians' wish to withdraw themselves from John of 
Antioch, Dr. Bright's imagination carries him at once back to 
this letter of the African Synod. He thinks that the Roman 
legates at Ephesus may have been absent from that particular 
session which dealt with the Cyprian case ; and that, they 
being absent, the deacon, named Besulas, who, though present, 
was not a constituent member of the Ephesine Synod, the 
bearer of the letter from the Bishop of Carthage (which Dr. 
Bright seems to forget spoke of the ' authority ' of the Apo- 
stolic See) managed to introduce into this so-called Canon of 
Ephesus the words ' worldly pride,' in allusion to that said 
letter of the African Council. 1 

Dr. Bright has to suppose, first, that the bishops at Ephesus 
had heard of the said letter of the African Council, a most 
unlikely supposition; next, that Besulas, a deacon, to use 
Dr. Bright's own words, ' represented Africa at Ephesus ; ' 2 
next, that the wording of the canon was due to Besulas, for 
which there is not an iota of proof, and then, that he intro- 
duced this clever and far-fetched allusion to the African letter, 
the legates happening to be absent, for if they were present 
' Besulas would hardly, perhaps ' (he is not quite certain even 
of this) * have quoted his Church's stringent admonition to 
their principal ' — the ' stringent admonition ' consisting, as 
we have seen, of an ' earnest entreaty.' And if he did not — 
that is to say, if the decree of the bishops of Ephesus only 

1 For the difficulties about this letter cf. p. 303. 

* Africa was represented through Capreolus' letter, accepting, by anticipation 
the joint action of the Holy See and the Council ; not by Besulas. 




360 



THE PELAGIAN SETTLEMENT. 



a.d. 400 



referred to the struggle for precedence actually going on 
between Antioch and Cyprus, and between Juvenal of Jeru- 
salem and the Bishop of Antioch (the natural and sufficient 
explanation of the term ' pride '), instead of to a matter with 
which they had nothing to do — ' if he did not, the coincidence 
is among the most remarkable on record 9 ! 

The coincidence consists in the use of the words ' smoky 
pride of the world ' in Africa some few years before, and of the 
words ' power of worldly pride ' now, in reference to a fierce 
struggle for precedence going on before their eyes, with which 
Borne had nothing to do. And their remote allusion to a 
letter from Africa, which expresses a fear of secular pomp, 
not in the Bishop of Borne (as Dr. Bright seems to imagine), 
but in the circumstances of legations in foreign countries, is, 
forsooth, introduced by bishops who, as we have seen, were at 
the moment on the most friendly, affectionate, and submissive 
terms with the reigning Pope, having just before spoken of 
their admiration for his care for the Church and for the 
Faith. 

And not only had they expressed their gratitude to the 
Pope for his guardianship of the faith, but, after concluding 
the affair of Nestorius, the council gave its hearty adhesion to 
all that had been settled by the Holy See in regard to the 
Pelagian heretics. It will be remembered that St. Augustine 
had claimed this settlement as sufficient without the apparatus 
of a general council. ' The rescripts have come from Borne ; 
the case is at an end,' was his dictum ; and the rescripts 
contained the fullest possible assertion of the necessity of 
referring matters of such importance to the Holy See. St. 
Augustine died just before the Council of Ephesus met. 
Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage, in response to an invitation to 
St. Augustine to attend the council, sent the letter alluded to 
above by the hands of a deacon, named Besulas, in which he 
deprecated, in the name of the African Church, any fresh 
investigation of the grievances of Pelagian or semi-Pelagian 
heretics, on the ground that their matters had been settled by 
' the authority of the Apostolic See and the consentient 
decision of the hierarchy' (of Africa), which had demolished 
(<rwix<o<rsv) those disturbers of the Church. Accordingly, as 




—452 



COROLLARIES. 



361 



we gather from the synod's report of its proceedings sent to 
Celestine, they entered upon no investigation of these matters. 
His Holiness did not wish it, and the African bishops, speak- 
ing through Capreolus, were anxious that they should not 
reopen the question. The bishops at Ephesus, therefore, 
simply accepted the decisions of the Holy See en bloc. And 
it was under these circumstances that Professor Bright ima- 
gines the bishops may have introduced a sly hit at Borne by 
using the words ' worldly pride * ! 



To sum up. The following conclusions emerge from the 
history of the Council of Ephesus. 

1. A certain hierarchical order obtained at that time 
amongst the greater sees of the Church. This order, though 
an ecclesiastical arrangement as regards the second and third 
see, ran up to apostolic times. 

2. There was a universal conviction on the part of the 
Easterns that the Bishop of Borne held a unique position as 
occupant of ' the Apostolic See.' 1 

8. He held this position as successor of St. Peter. 

4. This position involved the guardianship of the faith in 
a special sense, and a superiority of jurisdiction over the 
4 greater thrones.' 

5. The theory of independent national Churches is ex- 
cluded by anticipation. The nationality of Constantinople, on 
the one hand, and of Antioch on the other, did not free them 
from being subject to intervention on the part of the Bishop 
of Borne when circumstances demanded it ; and Alexandria, 
in spite of its differing nationality, held itself bound in duty 
to report 4 greater cases ' to Borne. 

6. An oecumenical council, which included the Pope, was 
infallible ; as also was the Pope in determining the question 
of faith. 

These are some of the rigorous conclusions to be drawn 
from the history of the Church in a.d. 431. Each one of 
them has its ' text ' in the Council of Ephesus. 

1 Cf. Appendix IV. p. 479. 



Conclusions. 




CHAPTEE XXL 



THE FOURTH GENERAL COUNCIL. 1 



I. We have seen that the principles which were formulated 
in the Vatican decree of 1870 were at work in the early 
Church from the first. They appear in the first recorded 
exercise of her teaching power outside the inspired pages of 
Holy Scripture. St. Clement's letter to the Corinthians was, 
according to the late Dr. Lightfoot, ' the first step towards 
Papal domination ; ' to a Catholic it was the first recorded 
exercise of Papal supremacy after the death of St. Peter. St. 
Clement pronounced judgment, uniting with himself the 
Church of Borne ; exercising his prerogative in unison, it would 
seem, with a council of whose authority he was the informing 
principle ; for it was for ever known in the Church as his 
letter. He claimed for his judgment the submission of those 
to whom he wrote, as to the voice of the Holy Ghost, and he 
denounced the sin of schism as the worst of evils. His letter 
was successful in its immediate results, and was read for some 
time in Christian churches as akin to Holy Scripture itself. 

We have seen, further, that at the Council of Nice, whose 
dogmatic decision was clothed with the robe of divine authority 
in the eyes of orthodox Christendom, the three Sees of Peter 
appear in command, with Borne at their head. The canons 
commonly called Sardican, and regarded as of equal authority 
with those of Nicaea itself (if not, as there is good reason for 
supposing, the very canons of the Nicene Council itself) 
recognised in the See of St. Peter the proper court of appeal 
for such bishops as felt that justice had not been done them 
in other courts. They applied and regulated an existing 

1 Where the person's name is given to whom letters of St. Leo are addressed 
I have not always given the number of the letter, whioh differs in different 
editions. I have myself used the Ballerini's edition. 




a.d. 400—452 ITS PLACE IN CHURCH HISTORY. 



363 



principle. When we come to the second oecumenical council, 
originally an Eastern synod, which became oecumenical through 
the acceptance of its dogmatic decision by the See of St. 
Peter, a new state of things was making itself felt. ' New 
Rome ' had come on to the scene ; and a struggle for prece- 
dence had commenced, which was destined to end only when 
' the scourge of God ' arose and brought the Byzantine empire 
to a close. The sword of Islam was the appointed avenger 
of the pride of that Queen of cities on the fair shores of the 
Bosphorus. 

Borne remained the Eternal City. Whilst again and again 
the Christian faith was all but wrecked in the East, each 
heresy that threatened the mystery of the Incarnation finding 
its home there, the See of St. Peter stood firm throughout. 

At Ephesus the judgment of Pope Celestine imposed itself 
upon the synod. St. Cyril, the Pope's delegate, was the 
Joshua that fought the battle on the plain below, whilst the 
Moses of the Christian Law, having delivered his charge to 
the warrior-bishop, sat on the throne of Peter with his hands 
upheld by his assisting synod. 

But if this is true of Ephesus, it is still more manifestly 
true of Chalcedon. The throne of Peter was occupied by one 
of those majestic figures which occasionally dominate the 
history of a whole period. Well did he merit his name of 
Leo ; and truly has posterity called him ' great.' St. Leo 
saved Christianity. For again the sum and substance of 
Christianity was at stake ; the Person of its Founder was 
again in question under another form, and St. Leo the Great 
was the instrument chosen by the Divine Founder of the 
Christian Church to vindicate the truth of His Incarnation. 

The Council of Chalcedon was the climax of the Church's 
conciliar utterances in the Person of our Redeemer — the last 
of the four Gospels, as St. Gregory called the first four coun- 
cils by way of similitude. It closed a complete series of denials, 
each one of which was absolutely fatal to a true hold on the 
economy of redemption. 

But (i.) it also led to a fuller knowledge of the treasure of 
Divine Revelation. The question all through the struggle 
turned on what was contained in the original deposit ; and 




364 



EUTYCHES CONDEMNED. 



a.d. 400 



the Church at large learnt more of the contents of that deposit, 
she was richer for the straggle, she learnt more of the glory 
of His Divine Majesty and of His infinite condescension, in 
whom her hopes are centred. 

(ii.) Bat the Church also learnt more of the meaning of 
that provision for unity, and of that guardianship of the faith, 
which her divine Head had instituted. She found that Peter, 
the foundation laid by Him, * lives and exercises judgment in 
his successors,' with a store of unfailing wisdom, the fulfilment 
of the divine promise, 'I have prayed for thee, that thy faith 
fail not.' His infallible guidance was equal to combining an 
unerring hold upon the apostolic deposit, with fresh definition 
to meet a fresh denial. The memory of Leo never left the 
Church. He said no more than others had said before him ; 
he uttered no new truth about the See of St. Peter ; not a 
note of surprise, as at any novel claim, was heard, for it was 
(as had been said at Ephesus) a truth ' known to all ages, and 
doubtful to none, that the blessed Apostle Peter, the Head 
and Prince of Apostles, received from the Saviour of the 
human race the keys of the kingdom ; and that he lives and 
exercises judgment in his successors.' But the circumstances 
under which Leo had to act ministered to a fuller apprehension 
of that truth. It was in the counsels of Divine Providence 
that the whole force of the * Petrine Privilege ' should be felt 
on a large scale, and under the pressure of unparalleled needs ; 
so that the Church might for ever know where her strength 
lay and never suffer her locks to be shorn. 

II. But to proceed to the actual history. ' A foolish old 
man,' as St. Leo called him, erring more from stupidity than 
the subtlety that misled Nestorius, was the cause of the 
storm that now burst upon the Church — a foolish old man, 
who boasted that he had kept his vow of continency in the 
monastic life, and who had all that natural influence which 
is invariably exercised, for good or evil, by men of recognised 
austerity. 

Eutyches (such was his name) adopted much the same 
method of argument as Nestorius. As Nestorius accused 
St. Cyril of Apollinarianism, so Eutyches accused his oppo- 
nents of Nestorianism. And as Nestorius endeavoured to gain 




—462 PRETENDS TO HAVE APPEALED 366 



the ear of Pope St. Celestine by accusing others of Apolli- 
narian teaching, so Eutyches endeavoured to win Pope St. 
Leo to his side by accusing others of Nestorianism. Eutyches 
took his stand in certain expressions of St. Cyril, so that in 
the ultimate issue St. Cyril's teaching became the field of 
battle. St. Cyril was the accepted exponent of the faith 
against Nestorius; St. Celestine decided in his favour, and 
the third oecumenical synod adopted St. Celestine's ruling. 
St. Cyril's exposition was now quoted by Eutyches in favour 
of a new heresy. St. Leo, in the name of the blessed Apostle 
Peter, promulgated an ex cathedra decision called his ' Tome,' 
condemning this new heresy, and the fourth oecumenical 
synod accepted his ruling. In this case, too, the * members 
joined themselves to the holy head,' as the action of the 
bishops in condemning Nestorius was described at the Council 
of Ephesus — after what struggles and calamities we shall 
now proceed to see. 

III. Eutyches was condemned in a synod at Constanti- 
nople, upon impeachment by Eusebius of Dorylaeum. Flavian, 
his archbishop, says that, after much fencing, Eutyches threw 
off all disguise, and said that ' we ought not to confess that our 
Lord subsisted in two natures after becoming man,' and that 
« the Body of our Lord, although born of the Virgin, who is 
consubstantial with us, is not itself consubstantial with us.' 
In this, says St. Flavian, 1 Eutyches ran counter to all the ex- 
positions of the holy Fathers.' The synod proceeded to 
degrade him from his ecclesiastical rank, and deprived him 
of the superintendence of his monastery, but they did not 
go on to expressly anathematise his teaching. 

IV. But the matter did not rest there. It was not enough 
that Eutyches had been condemned by his archbishop. There 
was no idea in the Church at large of the archbishop's judg- 
ment, even though pronounced in synod, being final. There 
were no such things in the early Church as independent 
provinces. There was a further court of appeal, recognised, 
as we shall see, on all sides as part of the Nicene settlement 
for the government of the Church, and recognised as such at 
Nicsea, or Sardica, or both, on the ground of the connection 
of one see with the prince and head of the Apostles, as St. 




366 



TO LEO, TO WHOM FLAVIAN 



a.d. 400 



Peter was acknowledged to be in the Council of Ephesos. 
There was, in the minds of the whole Church, an ' Apostolic 
See' — apostolic, not in the sense in which every bishop is a 
successor of the Apostles, but in a pre-eminent degree — and 
to that Apostolic See the case was now carried. 

We should not expect to find Eutyches exhibiting the 
methods of a sincere inquirer. He bad all the wiliness of a 
heretic. He looked round about at once for help, and, pro- 
bably, wrote letters to every quarter whence help might come. 
He knew that there was friction between his own saintly 
archbishop and the Archbishop of Alexandria, who proved 
the most bitter foe to the truth that even the distracted East 
produced. He may well have known the weakness of the 
Bishop of Jerusalem, which led him to such unfortunate 
conduct in the immediate future, and it is therefore exceed- 
ingly probable that he proceeded to enlist these bishops in 
his cause. At any rate, the patrician Florentius afterwards 
deposed that Eutyches had appealed to an Egyptian and 
Jerusalemite, as well as to a Roman council, at the end of 
the above-mentioned synod at Constantinople— but in an 
undertone. The account given by the monk Constantino may 
be passed over, as he was convicted of untrustworthiness at a 
second synod, or session. If, however, Eutyches did write to 
these other bishops, his letters are not extant ; and we can 
surmise nothing as to their contents. But what is certain is 
that Eutyches wrote to Rome, and sent the Pope, together with 
Eusebius' accusation and some testimonies (mostly supposi- 
titious) to himself, two documents, one a profession of faith, 
and the other a notice of appeal which he pretended to have 
handed in at the Synod of Constantinople. In his letter he 
asked the Pope to arrange that he might suffer no prejudice 
pending the appeal, on account of his condemnation by his 
archbishop, and he asked for a decision, on the matter of 



At the same time he wrote to St. Peter Chrysologus, 
Bishop of Ravenna, soliciting his interest. This saintly arch- 
bishop replied that he could not intervene in such a matter 
without the leave of his superior, the Bishop of Rome. He 



faith. 1 



1 Mansi, t. v. p. 1015. 




—462 



NARRATES THE CASE. 



367 



appears not to have learnt from Eutyches anything about the 
synod at Constantinople, and he knew nothing of the dogmatic 
epistle of St. Leo. 1 He accordingly advises Eutyches what to 
do. We are indebted to an important discovery of an old 
copy of St. Peter's letter in Greek, dated between a.d. 458 
and a.d. 455, and therefore strictly contemporary, for the 
whole text of the saint's words. He advises Eutyches 'to 
attend obediently to whatever is written from the most blessed 
Pope of the city of Borne, because blessed Peter, who both 
lives and presides in his own see, gives to those who seek it 
the truth of the faith.' 

Eutyches, in his letter to the Pope, had told a falsehood. 
He had not really lodged an appeal to Rome at the synod. 
But although he had not done this, his statement that he had 
is irrefragable evidence that the bishops of the East held that 
such an appeal, if given in at the right time, must have the 
effect of suspending their sentence. This was the point of 
Eutyches' statement, viz. to stay the proceedings. He knew 
that the Pope had only to suppose that an appeal had been 
lodged, and he would be able to enforce a suspension of pro- 
ceedings. 

V. Flavian also had written to St. Leo immediately after 
the synod, sending him the Acts. He notified, indeed, the 
condemnation of Eutyches to other bishops, but he sent the 
Acts of the synod to St. Leo alone, as to a superior court. 
His letter, however, did not arrive in due time, whether 
owing, as is supposed, to the management of Eutyches and 
his friends, it is impossible to say. 

Accordingly, St. Leo, on receiving Eutyches' letter, wrote 
at once to the emperor and to Flavian. The letters are both 
of the highest importance as showing what the Pope could 
assume as admitted by the Emperor of the East and the 
Archbishop of Constantinople. 

The emperor had taken Eutyches under his patronage, 
and written in his favour to St. Leo. The latter, having heard 
only from the emperor and Eutyches, tells the emperor that 
he cannot give judgment on the case until he has heard 
from Archbishop Flavian. He blames Flavian to the 



1 Mansi, t. v. p. 1346, 6, AdmonWo, 




368 



LEO BLAMES FLAVIAN. 



a.d. 400 



emperor for not having sent the Acts of the synod to Borne 
at once, 1 as he was in duty bound to do.' The Pope was not 
aware that Flavian had dispatched the Acts, but that from 
some mishap they had been delayed. If the emperor and 
Eutycheswere in concert — or rather Chrysaphius, the eunuch, 
who had poisoned the emperor's ear in favour of the heretic 
— to get judgment from Borne before the cause was properly 
heard, they were much deceived in their estimate of Leo. 
For the latter simply told the emperor that he was displeased 
that Flavian had not written, and that he had written to say 
so, and felt sure that after this ' admonition,' Flavian would 
send a report of all the proceedings, 1 ' so that judgment may 
be passed in accordance with evangelical and apostolical 
teaching.' 

To Flavian the Pope writes in terms of censure, for not 
having done his duty (' quod ante facere debuit ') in reporting 
everything ' as fully as possible.' 

It is impossible not to see in these letters plain evidence 
of the recognised position of the See of Borne as the supreme 
court of appeal. It was not Valentinian, but Theodosius, to 
whom St. Leo wrote, and it was of no less a personage than 
the Archbishop of Constantinople that he complained ; and 
his complaint to the Emperor of the East was, that the arch- 
bishop had contravened a rule of the Church in not sending 
his report to Borne. No mere patriarch could thus write to 
an emperor concerning a bishop beyond the limits of his 
own patriarchate ; and no one in his senses could have ven- 
tured to write thus in a matter which he felt concerned the 
salvation of the human race, except on the understanding that 
the rule was clear and undisputed. 

VI. This was in February, a.d. 449. St. Leo, though he 
wrote to the emperor and to Flavian, deferred his answer to 
Eutyches; but Eutyches, without waiting for the Pope's 
reply, imitated Nestorius in inducing the emperor to summon 
a council. He persuaded Dioscorus, Archbishop of Alexandria, 
who was prepared to act as his patron, to petition the 
emperor for a general synod, and his Imperial Majesty fixed 

1 'Quern credimus post admonitionem omnia ad noetram notitiam rela- 
turum ' (Leoni8 Ep. xxiv.). 




—452 



FLAVIAN PREFERS A PAPAL BRIEF 



369 



the ensuing August for its meeting. Probably the emperor 
had not yet received the Pope's reply. Certainly, Flavian 
had not heard of the definite decision of the emperor to 
plunge the East into all the difficulties of a council when he 
wrote his answer to Leo. That answer is another most im- 
portant item in the evidence supplied by the history of the 
Council of Chalcedon to the recognised position of thfe See of 
St. Peter. 

VII. Flavian in no way resented St. Leo's censure of his 
silence. As a matter of fact, he had written and sent the 
Acts of his synod, but they had miscarried, or been delayed 
on the way. The archbishop recognised the duty which lay 
upon him to report proceedings to Rome. He describes the 
whole situation, narrates the deposition of Eutyches, and 
says that the latter has appealed to the emperor, thereby 
trampling under foot the canons of the Church. Further, 
Flavian tells Leo that what Eutyches had asserted, unknown 
to him, in his letter to the Pope, viz. that at the synod he 
gave notice of appeal to Rome, is untrue. He implies that, 
had it been true, he would have suspended proceedings. 
Flavian does not afford in this important letter the slightest 
indication that in his judgment St. Leo was stretching his 
prerogative in writing to him as he had done. On the con- 
trary, he ends by invoking that prerogative as the only means 
of securing the peace of the Church. He asks the Pope to 
be bold with the boldness that becomes the priesthood, to 
' make the common cause his own,' and to deign to give his 
decision by means of briefs in accordance with the canonical 
deposition of Eutyches at the Constantinopolitan Synod. He 
asks the Pope thereby to ' confirm ' (using not the usual word, 
but that which occurs in our Lord's command to St. Peter 
in St. Luke xxii. l ) the faith of the emperor; and he says 
that ' the matter only needs your impulse and the help that 
is due from you through your own consent, to bring every- 
thing into peace and calm ; and so the heresy which has 
arisen, and the trouble that has ensued, will be brought to a 
happy conclusion, with the help of God, through your holy 



1 Mansi, t. v. p. 1354. Leonis Ep. xxvi. 



B B 




:;70 



TO A GENERAL COUNCIL. 



jl.d. 400 



briefs; and moreover the synod, about which there are 
rumours, will be prevented from taking place, and so the 
Churches in every quarter will not be troubled.' 1 

Flavian, therefore, profoundly distrusted the value of the 
rumoured synod, and looked to the timely exercise of the 
Papal prerogative as sufficient to secure the peace of the 
Church. 

And in expressing this conviction he bears witness to the 
fact that an equal reverence was attributed to the authority 
of the Apostolical See by the rest of the bishops in the East. 9 
Otherwise there would be no point in his remark, and no 
ground for his hope. 

The principle, therefore, of Church government which the 
Archbishop of Constantinople assumed as Catholic was this — 
he did not consider that matters should necessarily be con- 
cluded where they began. There was, as yet, no thought of 
the independence of national Churches, nor of each province 
finally settling its own matters. His connection with Borne 
was intimate and obligatory ; and it is clear that it did not 
depend on the civil position of that city. He wrote to Leo, 
as to him to whom it belonged to 'vindicate the common 
affairs of the Churches ; f he prayed him to issue briefs which 
might settle the disturbances of the Eastern Churches, and 
he alluded to the passage in St. Luke xxii., ' Confirm the 
brethren.' St. Leo had requested him not merely to notify 
the deposition of Eutyches, as he would do to other Churches, 
but to send him the Acts — precisely what is done for the 
revision of a sentence by a superior court. And Flavian 
accepts the position to enable St. Leo to do his duty, which 
St. Leo had said was impossible without a full report of the 
proceedings. 3 He states distinctly that not only was there 
no need of the judgment of any other Eastern patriarch, but 
that not even a general council was needed ; and Flavian 
knew well what the other Eastern bishops thought. 4 

This was in March, a.d. 449. In April Eutyches occupied 
himself with getting an assembly of thirty-four bishops con- 

1 Mansi, t. v. p. 1358. 

2 Cf. * Obs. Bailer, de Diss. Quean, de Eutych. Appell.,' Leonis Opera, t. ii. 
■ Ep. xxiii. 1 Mansi, t. v. p. 1356. Adnot. Bailer. 




— 4o2 



ST. LEO, AS HEIR OF PETER, 



371 



veiled in Constantinople to discuss an accusation which he 
had brought against the synod that condemned him of having 
falsified the documents — an accusation which miserably broke 
down. 

VIII. But in May Leo had received Flavian's report, and he 
at once took in the whole position. The lion was roused, and 
from that day onwards his activity, his decision, his wisdom, 
his piety, his tender charity and liis indomitable courage were 
such as to mark him out as one of the most extraordinary 
characters that have filled the pages of history, even were 
we to forget the effect of his noble presence on Attila, leader 
of the Huns outside the walls of Rome, or his influence over 
Genseric within the city. He had already given the death- 
blow to the remnants of Priscillianism ; he had baffled the 
clandestine movements of the Manicheans, and he had sent 
Pelagianism to its grave. But here was an enemy that 
threatened to shake the foundations of the Christian religion 
by a direct assault on the person of its Founder. All that 
activity, and ingenuity, and worldly prestige, all that the favour 
of princes and the friendship of the great could do, was en- 
listed in its favour. But St. Leo was more than a match for 
these. He was so in virtue of the divine promises to Peter, 
for we shall see that it was as the successor of St. Peter, and 
through the Church's recognition of the authority of the 
Apostolic See, that Leo triumphed. Had he been compelled 
to vindicate the authority of St. Peter's See — that is to say, if 
men had been able to resist him on the ground that our 
Lord did not include the successors of St. Peter in His com- 
mission to that Apostle — the position would have been an 
impossible one. But the faith of the Church had been de- 
clared in the most explicit terms at the Council of Ephesus. 
East and West had there agreed in the position that ' it had 
been known to all ages, and was doubted by none, that the 
blessed Apostle Peter, Prince and Head of the Apostles, 
received the keys of the kingdom from the Saviour of the 
world,' and that Pefcr ' lives and exercises judgment in his 
successors.' Such were the undisputed terms in which the 
Papal legates at Ephesus had expressed the general teaching 
of the Church, which by common consent had been placed 



D B 2 




372 



SENDS LEGATES WITH HIS TOME, a.d. 400 



in the archives of that oecumenical council, as containing 
nothing strange to the ears of the assembled bishops of the 
East. 

It was, then, as the successor of the Prince of the Apostles 
that St. Leo now acted, and that he claimed to act ; and no 
voice in the East was raised to deny this truth, save, in- 
directly, one, and that was the voice of the man who became 
the patron of Eutyches, and who was extruded from the 
Church at her oecumenical council at Ghalcedon. 

IX. The ides of June had come, and Leo having been 
already engaged on his longer epistle to Flavian, saw the 
necessity of taking more stringent measures to meet the diffi- 
culties in which Flavian was placed. He decided upon send- 
ing legates to Constantinople to inquire into the whole matter, 
and instead of sending his letter by Flavian's messenger, he 
sent it by these legates, together with others, addressed to 
Theodosius, to Pulcheria, to the Archimandrites of Constanti- 
nople, to the synod, of which he had now received notice, and 
in which he acquiesced, 1 and to Julian, Bishop of Cos, of whom 
more hereafter. 

The ' Tome of St. Leo,' as the epistle now sent to Flavian 
is called, stands almost alone, after Holy Scripture, in the 
reverence with which it was regarded for ages by the entire 
Church. Its reception was equalled only by the position 
assigned in the primitive Church to the letter of St. Clement, 
the third successor of St. Peter, written to the Corinthians in 
the first century. It was frequently read in the East after a 
general council in professions of faith. St. Gregory the Great 
says (Lib. vi. Ep. 2) : 'If anyone ever presumes to say any- 
thing against the faith of these four synods, and against the 
Tome and definition of Pope Leo, of holy memory, let him be 
anathema.' 

It opens with judging Eutyches at once, and then proceeds 
to that magnificent exposition of the ' sacrament of our faith,' 
which on its first perusal in youth has impressed so many 
much as the first sight of the sea. 

X. It is, however, with the ending of St. Leo's Tome that 

1 This was clearly the case, in spite of the apparent contradiction given at 
the Bobber Synod, which will be explained hereafter. 



Digitized by 



—452 



PRESCRIBING THE SENTENCE. 



373 



the purpose of this book is concerned. The Archbishop Flavian 
(be it remembered), to whom the Tome is addressed, had come 
before Leo as the judge of first instance, having synodicaily 
condemned a monk of his own archdiocese. He brought him 
before Leo in his letter as already condemned in the Con- 
stantinopolitan Synod, to be condemned more solemnly and 
by a final peremptory judgment passed by the Apostolic See. 
For he did not merely notify the deposition of Eutyches, but 
asked for help, and asserted that peace could only be obtained 
by Leo's approval of the Synod of Constantinople (whose Acts 
he sent) and by his issuing a brief to that effect. Accordingly 
at the end of his Tome St. Leo gave his judgment. 

Without referring the matter to a council of the whole 
West, he reviews the synodical acts, and in part confirms, in 
part disapproves, of the judgment of the Constantinopolitan 
Synod. He confirms the condemnation of Eutyches ; but he 
reprehends the acts of the synod as irregularly conducted. 
He blames the bishops for not having proscribed under 
anathema the heretical saying of Eutyches, ' I confess that 
our Lord consisted of two natures before the union, but I 
confess only one nature after the union.' And then he directs 
that Eutyches should be received back again if he repents, 
and gives the exact method of such reception. The matter, 
therefore, needed to be done more exactly and canonically 
than in the Synod of Constantinople. Eutyches might have 
thought that he had spoken some of these words ' rightly,' or 
that they were such as could be tolerated (« tolerabiliter '), so 
far as any expression of the synod to the contrary was con- 
cerned. ' In order, however, ' the Pope concludes, ' to bring 
this whole matter to the desired end, we have sent, in our 
stead, our brethren the Bishop Julius and the priest Eenatus, 
with my son, the deacon Hilarus, with whom we have associated 
the notary Dulcitius, whose faith has been approved by us, 
trusting that the help of God will be with us, that he who had 
erred may abjure his false opinion and be saved. God keep 
thee safe, dearest brother.' 

Such was the exercise of Papal jurisdiction contained in 
this letter, one of the most celebrated documents of Christian 
antiquity. 




374 



THE WITNESS OF THE TOME. 



A.D» 400 



. It may be noted in passing that St. Leo here calls 
the priest Benatus his brother ; but this letter is sufficient 
to show what the whole Catholic Church thought of the rela- 
tion of the Apostolic See to the rest of the episcopate. Here 
is a palpable exercise of authority, such as only belongs to the 
judge of a supreme court. None of the other patriarchs are 
taken into account ; St. Leo speaks in full authority, and that 
he was not usurping an authority which was disallowed by 
others is certain from the fact that the Council of Chalcedon 
and the whole Catholic Church accepted the Tome as a solemn 
judgment within the competency of the Pope's authority. 
Thus, not only did Eutyches pretend that he had appealed to 
the Pope, when it suited his purpose, on the understanding 
that his appeal would be sure to suspend the sentence of the 
Eastern bishops against him ; not only did Flavian send the 
synodical Acts to be reviewed by the Pope as judge in the 
matter ; not only did Leo act as judge and decide the case so 
far as could be done at a distance, and send legates to do the 
rest in his stead — but an oecumenical synod, and the universal 
Church for ever after, accepted as on a par with the definitions 
of Nicaea and Ephesus the Tome which contained this exercise 
of authority, against which not a protest, not a murmur, not 
a whisper was ever raised. 1 

It is as idle to call the teaching involved in this exercise of 
authority that of a * school of thought,' as it would be to call 
the Catholic doctrine concerning the single personality of our 
Lord a * school of thought ' simply because a certain number 
of bishops held aloof from St. Cyril in his contest with 
Nestorius. It was the school of thought that held its own at 
Ephesus, as being the only teaching of antiquity ' known to 
all ages ; ' and it prevailed in the future of the Church — in 
other words, it was the teaching, not of a school, but of the 
Church. St. Leo's Tome never could have been accepted by 
the Church unless the position of judge which he assumed 
therein was in accordance with apostolic doctrine. 

XI. Together with his 1 Tome ' or Epistle to Flavian, Leo 
sent a letter to the Emperor Theodosius, which is of import- 
ance as showing the grounds on which he acquiesced in the 

1 Cf . * Observ. Bailer, de Eutych. Appell.,' Leonis Opera, t. ii. 




—452 



IDEA OF THE COUNCIL 



375 



convocation of a general council. He says that Eutyches 
has been proved to have erred — there is no question, accord- 
ing to St. Leo, about that ; but since the emperor has settled 
upon a council at Ephesus 'that the truth may be made 
known to the unskilful old man,' he, the Pope, sends legates 
to supply his place. ' The legates,' says St. Leo, ' are com- 
missioned to carry with them a disposition to justice and 
benignity, so that, since there can be no question as to what is 
the integrity of the Christian faith, the depravity of error may 
be condemned.' If Eutyches repents — which the kind heart 
of the Pope always contemplates — the benevolence of the 
priesthood (bishops in the Greek version) is to come to his 
aid. Eutyches, says St. Leo, had promised him, in his 
original petition, that he would correct whatever the Pope 
condemned. 

The idea of the council, then, was that it was a fitting 
machinery to impress on Eutyches the importance of obeying 
the Papal decision, and to deal with him properly if he asked 
pardon. It was in this that the Constantinopolitan synod 
had come short of perfect justice and charity. 

XII. But St. Leo continues with the following descrip- 
tions of the position occupied by the decisions contained in his 
Tome or letter to Flavian. He says to the emperor, 'But 
what things the Catholic Church universally believes and 
teaches concerning the sacrament of the Lord's Incarnation 
are more fully contained in the writings which I have sent to 
my brother and fellow-bishop Flavian.' 1 

At the same time the Pope wrote to the saintly sister of 
the emperor, who had brought him up in his tender years 
under all the best influences of the Christian faith. It was 
not her fault, if her imperial brother now sided with heretics ; 
and it was to be her lot to assist the saintly Pope in the 
Church's struggle with the new heresy. To her — the Empress 
Pulcheria — St. Leo described the error of Eutyches as 1 con- 
trary to our only hope and that of our fathers,' and told 
her that, if he persists in his error, he cannot be absolved. 
€ For,' he adds, the * Apostolic See 2 both acts with severity in 

1 Manai, t. v. p. 1394. 

* Literally, * The moderation of the Apostolic See observes this discipline 
that it both,' Ac. Mansi, t. v. p. 1399. 




376 



THAT OF A FULLER, NOT OF 



A..D. 400 



the case of the obdurate, and wishes to pardon those who suffer 
themselves to be corrected. 9 It is obvious to remark that he 
considers the absolution of Eutyches to rest with the Apostolic 
See. He hopes that Pulcheria will do her best to help on the 
Catholic faith, and says that he has delegated his authority 
to those whom he has sent, that pardon may be bestowed if 
the error is done away. 

It is here, as elsewhere, the Apostolic See that is assumed 
to be the agent in the matter, and the council is to be con- 
cerned not with any question as to the true faith, but with 
moving Eutyches to repentance by the display of unanimity 
amongst the bishops. 

Still more important, if possible, are the terms of the 
letter which he sent to the Archimandrites of Constantinople. 1 
They are his 'beloved children/ He is sending to them 
persons ' a latere 9 to assist them in ' the defence of the truth,' 
not for the investigation of the faith. He sets his seal to 
their condemnation of Eutyches. If he repents and makes 
full satisfaction — which is the constantly recurring thought in 
Leo's mind — then 1 we wish him to obtain mercy.' But * as 
to the sacrament of the great love of God (pietatis magna) 
in which we have justification and redemption by the Incar- 
nation of the Word of God, our teaching from the tradition 
of the Fathers 2 is sufficiently explained in letters to Flavian, 
so that you may know from your chief {per insinvationem 
Prasvlis vestri) what in accordance with the Gospel of our 
Lord Jesus Christ we wish to be established in the hearts of all 
the faithful. 99 

XIII. Still more definite are the words of the Pope to the 
synod itself, which was to meet in August. He gives as the 
ground of its being convoked the emperor's wish to add the 
authority of the Apostolic See to his edict, 4 as though His 
Majesty desired ' that the meaning of the answer given by 
the Prince of the Apostles to our Lord's question should 
be declared by the most blessed Peter himself, 9 t.«. through his 
own see. The object of the council is further defined to be 

* Mansi, t. v. p. 1406. 

* 4 Nostra ex Patrum traditione sentential 9 Mansi, t. p. 1407. 

* 1 Ad Sanctis dispositionis effectum '— 4 dispositio ' being a term in use for 
imperial edicts. 




—462 



A HIGHER JUDGMENT. 



377 



that ' all error may be done away with by a fuller judgment ' 
(' pleniore judicio ')— exactly the idea of a council which has 
been given above. 1 The council was as it were the fuller and 
more emphatic utterance of the Papal judgment. Its action was 
to consist in adhering to the judgment of the Apostolic See — 
in, as it were, prolonging its utterance, and applying it 
materially and visibly to the person in hand. It was not a 
higher judgment, not the confirmation of a superior autho- 
rity, but the sentence of the Pope swelling out and com- 
pleted by its synodical proclamation, as the sufferings of 
Christ are completed by those of His followers. His legates 
were to provide over its actual utterance ; they were to de- 
termine 2 with the holy assembly of the episcopal brother- 
hood 4 what things will be pleasing to the Lord.' The Pope 
then goes on to give a sketch of what Eutyches should do, 
and repeats what he had already said to Flavian, viz. that 
Eutyches had promised to obey the Holy See in the docu- 
ment (' libellus ') which he had originally transmitted. 3 

One other letter he writes on the same day to Julian, 
Bishop of Cos, in the course of which he says he has sent 
letters to Flavian ' from which both your beloved self and the 
whole Church may know about the ancient and only faith, what 
we hold and preach as of divine tradition.' 

No sooner had the legates set out with this batch of letters 
than Flavian's original letter (written immediately after the 
Constantinopolitan Synod) arrived, containing another copy of 
the Acts of the synod which he had spontaneously sent to 
Borne, and which had been mysteriously delayed. Leo at 
once wrote to him briefly, saying that the synod was not 
really needed. And he took the opportunity of writing once 
more to the emperor, excusing himself from attendance at 
the synod on three grounds : first, because there was no pre- 
cedent for a Pope attending such a council (except, of course, 
by his legate) ; secondly, if there were, temporal necessities 
at home were in the way (the barbarians were wellnigh at 
the door) ; and thirdly, because the case was so clear that 
there was no real need (' rationabilius abstinendum '). Still 
he says he sends legates. 

' P. 330. * Mansi, t. v. p. 1411. * Ibid. 




CHAPTER XXII. 



THB COUNCIL AT EPHB8UB, CALLED THE LATROCINIUM, OR ROBBER 
SYNOD — LEADING TO THE COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON. 

I. On August 8, a.d. 449, the ill-fated council met. It had 
been convened at the express desire of Dioscorus, Patriarch 
of Alexandria, a man of immoral life and violent temper, 
animated with furious hatred against Flavian and a deter- 
mination to protect Eutyches. The Emperor Theodosius 
seems to have been completely in the hands of his eunuch 
Chrysaphius, the friend of Eutyches, and to have been 
perfectly indifferent to canons and laws of the Church. He 
repeated the experiment which he bad made in the affair of 
Nestorius, of appointing the president of the synod, but this 
time with success. He appointed Dioscorus president in 
defiance of the laws of the Church, and he forbade Theodoret, 
Bishop of Cyrus, to attend the synod, on the ground that he 
had written against Cyril, but really because he was opposed 
to Dioscorus and Eutyches. Further, he commanded the 
attendance of Elpidius with a band of soldiers, with the view 
of forcing on the condemnation of Flavian, whom he called an 
innovator in religion. These were terrible auspices under 
which to commence a synod. 

But the emperor did not even stop there. He commanded 
the attendance of an Archimandrite of Syria, named Bar- 
sumas, who was afterwards credited by the bishops at 
Chalcedon with the murder of Flavian ; and not only his 
attendance was ordered as an anti-Nestorian, which was the 
attitude that the adherents of Eutychianism assumed, but the 
synod was ordered to give him a seat and vote, although not 
a bishop. The position seems at first sight that of a madman. 
But Theodosius was under the influence of others, and these 




a d. 400-452 



EUTYCHES ACQUITTED. 



379 



others were reckless in their endeavours to vent their spite 
against the orthodox party. 

Dioscorus seems to have been consumed with the spirit 
of jealousy, and he at once accepted the position of pre- 
sident. He sat above the legates, who stood out against this 
innovation upon the Church's order, aud took no regular 
seat in the council, but stood outside the bishops. Juvenal 
of Jerusalem, who was infected with Eutychian leanings, and 
had been joined on to Dioscorus by the emperor as one of 
the presidents, sat above the Bishop of Antioch, against 
whom he had long had a grudge ; and in spite of the famous 
canon passed at Constantinople, Flavian, its archbishop, sat 
below each of these. 

II. When the proposal was made to read St. Leo's Tome, 
Dioscorus simply occupied the time with other matters, and 
the Tome was never read. Eutyches had a confession of 
faith read on his behalf, which was accepted. His great point 
was that he accepted the Nicene Creed and the Ephesine 
decree — so little did the recitation of the Nicene Creed ex- 
clude heresy as to the central dogma of the Christian religion, 
and so utterly at variance with the facts of the early Church 
is the contention, now often made, that since 'Komans, 
Greeks, Anglicans ' recite the Nicene Creed, there is sufficient 
unity of faith amongst them to constitute a visible Church. 

Dioscorus accepted Eutyches' confession of faith, and his 
condemnation was reversed. In vain did the legates plead 
that the Tome of St. Leo should be read. The letters of 
St. Cyril were read and interpreted in favour of ' one nature 
after the Incarnation.' Eustathius of Berytus said that it 
was not St. Cyril's or St. Athanasius' teaching that there 
were two natures in Christ, using, however, an expression 
which refers in Cyril's writings to the One Nature and Divine 
Personality which existed before the Incarnation. The 
bishops held their tongues in terror, with Dioscorus before 
them, surrounded by soldiers and by the monks of Barsumas. 
They were dumb as the bishops in England in the Convoca- 
tion of 1581, when in terror of Henry VIII. they gave a silent 
vote in favour of his supremacy. 

Flavian was forthwith condemned. The Bishop of Ico- 




380 



FLAVIAN MURDERED. 



A..D. 400 



mum threw himself at the feet of Dioscorus, and pleaded for 
Flavian. Dioscorus called for the soldiers, and the place was 
immediately filled with the rough military, with chains in 
their hands to lead off refractory bishops. They were locked 
in for the rest of the night. A blank paper was given them 
to sign ; the sick were not allowed to go out for refreshment 
until they had subscribed the paper. Flavian now appealed 
to Some, and this was the signal for blows and kicks from the 
monks, headed by Barsumas, and from Dioscorus himself. 
The old man eventually died of the injuries; but he had 
lodged his appeal to Borne before he went before another 
throne to receive the martyr's crown. Well might many of 
the bishops at Ghalcedon, as they thought of this murdered 
Abel, call Dioscorus a second Cain. 

Domnus, the Bishop of Antioch, was deposed, as also 
Theodoret. Maximus was chosen in the place of Domnus, 
but the See of Cyrus was left unfilled. Eusebius of Dory- 
lffium, and Ibas, were likewise deposed, the see of the 
former being left vacant, while that of the latter was filled by 
Nonnus. 

No one knows what became of Bishop Julius, the legate, 
in this scene of disorder, but Hilarus, the deacon, fled for his 
life, 1 and escaped to tell the tale to his master at Borne. 

Such were the circumstances under which the authority 
of the Apostolic See was set at nought by a Christian bishop, 
with the protest only of the Papal legates, the Bishop of 
Iconium and the martyred Archbishop of Constantinople. 

Dioscorus departed in haste and the assembly dispersed. 
And so, as Bishop Eusebius of Dorylaeum afterwards informed 
the Emperors Valentinian and Marcian, Dioscorus, * by money 
and by the brute force of his troops, overwhelmed the ortho- 
dox faith, and confirmed the heresy of Eutyches.' The synod 
was stigmatised by Leo as a ' Bobber Council ' rather than a 
true synod, and for ever after it was known by that expres- 
sive title. 

III. Now let us suppose that the Church at this moment 
possessed nothing more for the purposes of her government 
than a 4 first patriarch,' primus inter pares, with 4 a prece- 



1 So Prosper, in bis Chronicon. 




—452 



NEED OF A SUPREME RULER. 



381 



dency, a pre-eminence/ and (in a sense not formal or technical) 
' a leadership,' but without ' definite powers ' — which is the 
highest Anglican description of the official position of the 
Holy See. Suppose, too, that this precedency was owing, not 
to a divine institution, but to the secular position of the city 
of Borne, to its having been ' organised by apostolic hands/ 
and having been connected with ' the majesty of the names 
of Peter and Paul,' and become 4 famous for its bountiful 
generosity ' and for ' its traditional immunity from heretical 
speculations.' This is the account given by a representative 
Anglican writer, of the ' place both lofty and distinctive,' * un- 
doubtedly assigned by ancient Christianity' to the See of 
Borne. 1 

Would such a leadership have proved equal to the crisis 
that had arisen in the East under the Emperor Theodosius ? 
Could such a leadership (which does not include the right of 
being appealed to as a higher court) have been able to reverse 
the catastrophe of the Bobber Synod ? Could such a position, 
with no 4 definite powers,' no inheritance of rule and judg- 
ment from any ' Prince of Apostles ' (for this is excluded by 
that theory), have been a sufficient lever for even Leo the 
Great to counteract the tremendous success over the orthodox 
faith which had now been achieved at Ephesus ? Peckham, 
Archbishop of Canterbury, complaining to Edward I. of the 
conflicts that had arisen in England between the Church and 
State, says that nothing would avail to set things right except 
that state of things in which Catholic emperors bent before 
(1) the decrees of the Sovereign Pontiffs, (2) the statutes of 
councils, (3) and the sanctions of the orthodox Fathers. And 
in regard to the first he says, 4 the sovereign Lord of all gave 
authority to the decrees of the Sovereign Pontiffs, when He 
said to Peter in the Gospel of St. Matthew, " Whatsoever thou 
shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven." ' 2 Could any- 
thing short of this inherited privilege of Peter, which was the 
teaching of every Archbishop of Canterbury, and which is the 
distinctive feature of Catholic and Boman teaching at this 

1 Cf. The Roman Claims tested by Antiquity, p. 8, by W. Bright, D.D., Canon 
of Christ Church, Begins Professor of Ecclesiastical History. 1877. 

* Ep. 199 : Registtum Epistolarum, ed. C. T. Martin (1882), vol. i. p. 240. 




382 



LEO ACTED AS SOVEREIGN. 



a.d. 400 



hour, be adequate to deal with the state of things that had 
now arisen in the East ? 

IV. On what did St. Leo actually rely ? He had already 
expounded the faith which he 'desired to be implanted in 
the hearts of all the faithful/ as he told the clergy of Con- 
stantinople. He had already given an 'interpretatio benigna' 
to the emperor's desire for a council as necessarily involving 
the wish to have Peter's answer at Caesarea Philippi ex- 
plained by Peter himself (i.e. through his see), as he told the 
synod itself; he had reviewed and revised the Acts of a pre- 
vious Synod of Constantinople, and laid down the conditions 
of Eutyches' restoration, and, in his letter to the empress 
he had assumed, on the ground of his occupying ' the Apo- 
stolic See,' the office of absolver of the heretic in case he re- 
pented. But he had now to lift up the fallen East. He had 
the emperor against him ; the Patriarch of Alexandria was 
involved in heresy, a new patriarch had been elected to 
Antioch, the Bishop of Jerusalem had sided with the enemies 
of the faith, and but one bishop, besides his own legate, had 
dared to lift up his voice in favour of the murdered arch- 
bishop. 

On what, then, did Leo rely in dealing with bishops, 
patriarchs, and an Eastern emperor ? His position as Bishop 
of Old Rome could avail him nothing, for Theodosius was 
Emperor of New Rome. His position as occupant of an 
Apostolic See would not suffice ; the Bishop of Jerusalem was 
his equal there. The traditional orthodoxy of Rome would 
be of no use to him here ; the East had gone in for its own 
opinion. He had with him the hearts of many, but the 
voices of none, whilst the emperor professed to believe in an 
Eastern council of bishops under his own royal supremacy. 
What right had Leo to intervene at all ? 

The ground that he did assume was his position of Sove- 
reign Pontiff. He knew well that though they might rebel 
against it, they could not deny it. He knew that the East to 
a man believed St. Peter to be • the Prince and head of the 
Apostles/ and that Peter 4 lives and exercises judgment in his 
successors.' 1 And on this belief he acted throughout. And 



1 Cf. p. 344. 




—462 



FLAVIAN'S APPEAL TO ROME. 



383 



in the whole course of the Council of Chalcedon not a single 
protest was raised against the assumption made to emperor, 
empress, to the synod, and to individual bishops — made 
publicly and given as the ground of his action ; there was, I 
say, not a solitary protest against the perpetual assumption 
on the part of the Pontiff that he was the successor of St. 
Peter, and that as such he had the power of the keys, not 
exclusively, but pre-eminently ; with a precedence, not of 
honour merely, but of spiritual jurisdiction over the entire 
Church of God. 1 It is idle to bid us acknowledge her bishop ' 
(i.e. the Bishop of Rome) 4 as first patriarch, when he will not 
be acknowledged as anything short of a Supreme Pontiff.' 1 
This is the ground alleged for refusing at this moment to the 
Bishop of Rome the position which the writer of these words 
considers was his in the first four councils. It has, however, 
already been made clear that the Pope's position was some- 
thing very different from this from the beginning ; but the 
history of Eutychianism and the Council of Chalcedon are 
distinct in their evidence to the truth that the Pope was held 
to be the successor of the Prince of the Apostles, and as such 
was, as St. Cyril called Celestine, 1 the archbishop of the 
universal Church.' 

V. Flavian upon his condemnation at Ephesushad handed 
in an appeal to the Papal legates. He appealed to 1 the Apostolic 
See ; 9 so Liberatus, the African author of the 1 Breviarium,' 
states 3 after inspecting the documents. And Valentinian, 
the Emperor of the West, distinctly states the same in his 
letter to Theodosius. 'The Bishop of Constantinople appealed 
to him 9 (viz. the Bishop of Rome) 1 by formal notice,' per 
libellos.* De Marca, whose general line of argument would 
naturally indispose him to admit this, says, 1 It is clearly 
proved by Valentinian's letter that Flavian appealed to Pope 
Leo ; ' and again, ' so as that he appealed to the Roman 
Pontiff alone.* The Empress Placidia, 4 writing from Rome, 
says that appeal had been made to the Apostolic See, 1 and to 
all the bishops of these parts.' 1 These parts ' are not to be 
understood of the entire West, but of those bishops round 

1 Roman Claims, &c. by Canon Bright. 

* Breviarium, c. xii. * Leon. Ep. lv. * Ibid. Ep. lvi. 



Digitized by Google 



384 



TIDINGS OF THE CATASTROPHE 



a.d. 400 



about Borne, and all others happening to be in Borne, with 
whom the Popes almost invariably acted in matters of un- 
usual importance. The authority of such a synod was 
wholly due to that of the Holy See. For no mere Boman 
synod could have the right to deal with the affairs of an 
Eastern patriarchate ; the authority of such a synod could 
only come from its president, the successor of St. Peter, in 
whose name its decisions most frequently ran. When a Pope 
felt that the unanimity of his council would add any extrinsic 
weight to the Papal judgment he would naturally mention it, 
as in point of fact St. Leo did in this case. But its intrinsic 
value was recognised as being due to the authority of ' the 
Apostolic See.' Flavian knew well that the Pope usually 
acted with a synod, and he may have mentioned the synod, 
as the Empress Galla Placidia seems to imply ; or the em- 
press may (quite as probably) have thrown the words in, as 
being true in fact, although not expressly mentioned by 
Flavian. 1 St. Leo's letter to Theodosius, speaking of the 
tears of 4 all the churches in our parts,' is headed 'Leo, 
Bishop, and the Holy Synod, which met in the city of Borne.' 
But, as De Marca admits, Valentinian's letter is conclusive. 

VI. On September 29 (449) St. Leo was holding one of 
these synods of the suburbicarian sees and of the bishops who 
happened to be in Borne, assembled to celebrate the anni- 
versary of his own birthday, and conduct the affairs of the 
Church, when Hilary, the deacon, arrived from Ephesus with 
the sad news of the Bobber Council. The synod was accord- 
ingly prolonged to consider what steps should be taken to 
retrieve the disaster which had befallen the true faith. They 
had now before them the appeal of Flavian and that of 
Theodoret. They knew nothing as yet, it would seem, 2 of the 
death of Flavian, and the election of his successor. They only 
knew of the triumph of heresy in a council of bishops which 
had received St. Leo's acquiescence on the understanding that 
it met to promulgate the condemnation of Eutyches, if he did 
not withdraw his heretical propositions, and to absolve hiip by 
the authority of the Holy See if he did. 

1 Cf. the Ballerini's Observations on QuesncVs Eighth Dissertation. 
9 This is very clearly shown by the Ballerini. 




—462 



INDUCED LEO TO DEMAND 



385 



St. Leo, in concert with his bishops, at once repudiated 
the council at Ephesus ; so that Hilary, the deacon, who was 
present, could write to the Empress Pulcheria saying 1 ' that 
everything done in Ephesus by Dioscorus uncanonically and 
tumultuously and through worldly hate, is condemned by the 
aforesaid Pope with the whole Western Council,' i.e. the 
bishops at and around Rome. At Chalcedon (Act X.) the 
legates objected to the reading of the Acts of the Bobber 
Synod on the ground that they had all been rendered null 
and void 4 by the most blessed and apostolical Bishop of the 
city of Borne,' and the validity of the objection was admitted. 

And so, too, all who took an active part in that synod 
were now separated by St. Leo from the communion of the 
Apostolic See. 

VII. So that Leo did not ask for any fresh council in order 
to nullify the proceedings at Ephesus, but he treated them at 
once as null and void. No general synod was needed for 
that; and Flavian had not appealed to a general synod. 
Besides the reasons just given, his principles on that point 
were clearly expressed in his letter to St. Leo (' Ep.' xxvi.), when 
he said that the exercise of Leo's authority would supersede 
the necessity of a council ; and his experience of the Ephesine 
Synod would not incline him to repeat the experiment of 
another council. He appealed to Leo's apostolical authority, 
in accordance with the canon of Sardica or Nice, and it rested 
with Leo to exercise that authority as he thought best, by 
synod or otherwise. St. Leo considered that a council was 
rendered necessary by the circumstances under which Flavian 
appealed, not by Flavian's appeal itself. The Pontiff acted in 
exact accordance with the fourth canon of Sardica, or (as I 
have said there is good reason for believing it to be) the un- 
mutilated canon of Nicaea, which came to be called a Sardican 
canon. That canon enacted that 'When any bishop shall 
have been deposed by the judgment of those bishops who live 
in the neighbouring parts, and shall have proclaimed that his 
case is to be dealt with in Borne, no other bishop should be 
ordained to his see after the appeal of him who seems to be 



1 Leonis Ep. xl. 



C C 




386 



ENFORCEMENT OF THE 



a.d. 400 



deposed until the case has been decided by the judgment of 
the Roman bishop.' 

What, therefore, was necessary according to this Nicene, 
or Sardican, canon was the judgment of the Bishop of Borne ; 
and the Bishop of Rome had the right, according to this 
canon, to demand that things should remain as they were, 
and no bishop be ordained until he had passed his sentence. 1 

Accordingly, in the following January (450),* the Pope 
wrote to the Emperor Theodosius, who, he well knew, recog- 
nised in him the successor of St. Peter, in spite of his having 
yielded to Ghrysaphius his eunuch, and thrown his imperial 
aegis over the reprobate Patriarch of Alexandria. Now it was 
not a time in which a man like St. Leo, whose whole soul 
was on fire with zeal for the truth of the Incarnation, would 
venture on an unsubstantiated claim, or claim an unrecognised 
position. He must have known that there was no one who 
would deny his connection with St. Peter, or he would never 
have run the risk, under the circumstances, of being asked on 
what ground he ventured to intervene with such a claim. The 
idea that he acted as 4 First Patriarch ' is out of the question. 
There is not a sign of such a thought in the whole history ; 
and the idea that he risked all on a doubtful position, or 
asserted what was not fully recognised, is preposterous. But 
the only alternative to this is the supposition that what was 
accepted without a murmur at the (Ecumenical Council of 
Ephesus was the literal truth, viz. ' That it has been known 
to all ages and doubtful to none 9 that Peter was the head of 
the Apostles, and that 4 he up to this time and always lives 
and exercises judgment in his successors.' 

Accordingly, Leo wrote to the emperor and demanded the 
fulfilment of 'the decrees of the canons drawn up (habitonm) 
at NicaBa.' And in virtue of these he asked that * you would 
order that all things should be as they were before any judg- 
ment was passed [i.e. at the Bobber Council] until a larger 
number of bishops can be gathered together from the whole 
world ; * and that this synod be assembled in Italy, ' bo that I 

1 Cf . supra, p. 180. 

' This date has been fixed by the Ballerini through a oodex whioh they 
reoovered (of. Leonis Opera, Ep. liv., and Diss, de Bp. deperd. n. 88). 




-462 



SARDICAN CANON 



387 



may be present and pass judgment on the whole matter. 9 1 The 
object of the council was that those bishops ' who have erred 
from the right way may be recalled to a sound mind by whole- 
some remedies, and that those whose case is graver may 
acquiesce in counsels (given), or be cut off from the One 
Church/ 

He speaks of the emperor having sent letters, previously 
to the Robber Council, ' to the see of the blessed Apostle Peter,' 
and having made him feel sure that truth would be defended, 
especially considering the trustworthy character of those whom 
he (the Pope) had sent to the council ; then he expresses his 
certainty that all would have been well with the bishops if 
they had been allowed to hear his letter to Flavian (the Tome) ; 
1 for the tumult would have been so quieted by the manifesta- 
tion of the most pure faith which, inspired divinely, we have 
received and hold, that neither unskilfulness would have 
pursued its folly* (in allusion to Eutyches), ' nor rivalry ' (in 
allusion to Dioscorus against Constantinople) ' have had the 
opportunity of doing further harm.' 

These words of St. Leo to an Eastern emperor, written 
after consultation with the Synod of Rome, contain as full an 
expression of infallibility as is anywhere to be found. One 
expression, if taken too strictly, goes beyond the Vatican 
decree. That decree, in formulating the dogma which is here 
assumed by St. Leo, decides that the Pope does not, in his 
ex cathedrd pronouncements, claim inspiration but divine 
assistance. It is clear, however, that St. Leo held the same. 
Inspiration, in its earlier, wider sense, includes the assistance 
vouchsafed to the writers of Holy Scripture. But the saint 
here limits the word by the rest of the sentence, and shows 
that he means exactly that divine assistance in declaring what 
1 has been received by us ' (i.e. the Holy See), which con- 
stitutes Papal infallibility according to the Vatican decree. 

The position, then, as St. Leo placed it before the emperor, 
was this. The synod has gone wrong. That is certain. 
Had the bishops had St. Leo's Tome read to them they 
would have gone right. Violence and intrigue prevailed ; but 
Flavian protested and appealed, and so did the Papal legates. 



1 Cf. Ep. xliU. and xliv. 



c c 2 




388 



BY REASON OF 



a.d. 400 



It is necessary, therefore, according to the canons, that the 
Pope should intervene. This, under the circumstance, will 
be best done by the medium of a general council, whereby 
alone (St. Leo says) * all conflict would be brought to an end, 
and all deviation from or doubts as to the faith cease.' 1 

At the same time he wrote to the Empress Fulcheria, and 
said that his legates protested, at the synod, that force was 
being used, and ' that they were not going to be separated by 
any injuries from that faith which had been most fully ex- 
pounded and set in order by the See of the blessed Apostle 
Peter, and which they had brought with them to the holy 
synod.' 

He asked the empress to assist him in getting another 
synod convoked, and to consider herself 1 specially entrusted 
with a commission (for that purpose) by the most blessed 
Apostle Peter.' 

VIII. Theodosius kept perfect silence. A few weeks after 
the despatch of these letters the Emperor Valentinian came to 
Borne with the Empresses Galla Placidia, his mother, and 
Eudoxia, his wife, and daughter to Theodosius. On the Feast 
of the Chair of St. Peter they came into St. Peter's for their 
devotions, and met the sorrowing Pontiff. They were at the 
tomb of the Apostles in the Basilica, and his Holiness ap- 
proached their Imperial Majesties, hardly able to speak for the 
tears and sobs that choked his utterance. 9 He described to 
them the state of things, and told them of his request for 
another synod, and induced them to use their influence with 
their imperial relative to induce him to answer the Pope's 
request. 

Accordingly each one of them wrote to Theodosius. The 
Western emperor's letter to his imperial relative in the East 
is of supreme importance. It is, I repeat, impossible to 
suppose that Valentinian would venture on any disputed 
ground as to jurisdiction. Valentinian's letter was inspired 
by Leo. And no one can read St. Leo's letters at this period 
without feeling that his supreme motive was the honour due 
to our Divine Lord and his devouring zeal for the revealed 

1 Ep. xliii. 9 Ep. lvi. 1 Galla Plac. ad Theodosium.' 




—452 



FLAVIAN'S APPEAL, 



389 



truth concerning the mystery of the Incarnation. No one can 
read his letters without feeling that a certain piety, humility, 
and holy charity breathes through every one of them ; and 
therefore no one can reasonably suppose that he was engaged 
in pushing a usurped prerogative at this momentous crisis. 
What, then, does Valentinian, thus inspired, say to his im- 
perial cousin ? He says, 4 The most blessed Bishop of the city 
of the Romans, to whom antiquity gave the sovereignty over 
all ' (as being the See of St. Peter, as we know Valentinian 
held), ' has to judge concerning matters of faith and the affairs 
of bishops,' and that on this account the Bishop of Constanti- 
nople appealed to him by a formal notice 1 4 on account of the 
strife that had arisen concerning the faith.' And so he is 
induced to write to Theodosius that ' he would acquiesce in 
the petition of Flavian that the aforesaid bishop [of Rome] 
having gathered all the bishops of the whole world within 
Italy, may without prejudice, and going into the whole matter, 
give the judgment which faith and the word of divine truth 
require.' The empress wrote at the same time, describing 
the scene in St. Peter's, speaking of Flavian's appeal to Rome, 
and that of the Papal legates. At the same time she wrote to 
the Empress Pulcheria, 2 and, after describing the tears of 
Leo, expressed her hope that all that had been decided at the 
4 tumultuous and most miserable ' Council at Ephesus will be 
treated as null and void, and that 4 all things remaining un- 
injured [i.e. in statu quo, as provided by the fourth canon, so 
called, of Sardica] the judgment will be remitted to the council 
of the Apostolic throne, in which Peter, the most blessed Peter, 
first of the Apostles, having received the keys of the heavens, 
adorned the headship of the hierarchy. For we ought to give 
the primacy in all things to the Eternal City.' 

At the same time Leo wrote to the clergy and people of 
Constantinople, promising them all possible support from his 
fatherly care for them, and bidding them use their influence 
to obtain a plenary synod ; and explained to the Empress 
Pulcheria that human affairs can go smoothly only when the 
royal and sacerdotal authorities defend those matters which 
belong to a 4 divine confession,' as a reason for Theodosius 

1 Ep. lv. LeofUs Opera, ed. Bailer. 2 Ep. lvi. 




890 



ON THE01X)SIUS , DEATH 



A.D. 400 



and himself working together — a reason, that is, why the 
emperor should consent to a council. This was in February, 
450. 

IX. Meanwhile letters were on their way from the clergy 
and people of Constantinople and from the archimandrites 
Martin and Faustus, written in the preceding October, and St. 
Leo wrote one of his most magnificent letters in reply. He 
speaks of his writings having been directed to the East, ' not 
only by the authority of the Apostolic See, but also with the 
unanimity of the holy synod, which had frequently met, that 
the care which we have for the whole Church may be apparent, 
by our exhortations addressed to all the faithful and our 
demand for help in the defence of the faith from the most 
clement princess.' 

Meanwhile, he directs Martin and Faustus to make known 
to the children of the Church * what we preach contrary to the 
impious sense [of Eutyches] and in accordance with the evan- 
gelical and apostolical doctrine ; for although we have written 
fully what is and always has been the sententia of Catholics, 
still we add now no little exhortation to confirm the minds of 
all. For I am mindful that I preside over the Church in his 
name whose confession was praised by the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and whose faith destroys all heresies, but above all the im- 
piety of the present error ; and I understand that nothing else 
is permitted to me than that I should spend all my efforts on 
that cause in which the safety of the Universal Church is 
attacked.' Accordingly, that there may be no mistake about 
his teaching, in case they should not have received a copy of 
his writings, he sends fresh copies. 1 

Such was the tremendous energy of this single-minded 
hero of the great conflict for ' the only hope of the human 
race/ 

So far as the Emperor Theodosius was concerned, it was 
all in vain. 

X. In the midst, however, of Leo's difficulties, the 
Providence of God removed Theodosius, after many signs (if 
Nicephorus is to be relied on) of true repentance. He had 



1 Ep. lxi. 




—452 



THE COUNCIL IS GRANTED. 



391 



selected for his heiress a saintly woman, under a vow of perpe- 
tual chastity, of whom St. Cyril says that in her 1 every kind 
of virtue and every adornment pleasing in the eyes of the 
Divine Majesty shone with wonderful splendour.* 1 No woman, 
however, had as yet held the reins of empire ; and accordingly 
she offered her hand and throne to the most distinguished 
general of the day, on condition that he should respect her 
vow. Marcian was a worthy husband to St. Pulcheria, re- 
nowned as well for his piety as for his military skill. Every- 
thing was now changed, for the emperor and empress re- 
garded their position simply as an opportunity for protecting 
the true faith. 

X. Pulcheria's entreaties toTheodosius that he would accede 
to the Pope's request for a council to be called in Italy had 
failed. But in her new position her first care, as also that of 
her husband, was to carry out the wishes of Leo. The imperial 
zeal, however, was ' without knowledge/ for their very advent 
to the throne had made a council unnecessary. But this they 
did not know ; and accordingly they wrote to Leo, acquainting 
him with the fact that they had acted at his instigation in 
memory of the scene at St. Peter's, and had issued an edict 
for the convention of a council. 2 Not in Italy, since the reason 
for that no longer existed, as it would be best held under their 
own protecting presence, in the East, where all the disturbance 
had taken place. 

The Pope told their Imperial Majesties that he no longer 
desired a council. The bishops had signed his epistle to 
Flavian in such numbers, and so many were daily returning 
in penitence, that his legates at Constantinople, in concert 
with Anatolius (who had also signed the Tome of Leo), could 
manage the rest. But Leo was not the man to quench the 
zeal of emperors ; and since, out of pure love of the truth and 
devotion to himself, they had issued the edict, imagining it 
to be his desire, he praised in them what he sincerely admired, 
viz. their zeal, and consented to send legates. 3 

1 Cyr. Alex, de Fide ad Pitich. et Sorores Reginas. 

* aov au0§rrovrros : at which everything was to be decided by Leo's authority, 
cov abBirrovrros bpiavatv, Ep. lxxvii. 

• • Doubt has arisen respecting the true faith, as is shown by the letters of 




392 



THOUGH NOT NEEDED. 



aj>. 400 



The emperor and empress, in expressing the purport of 
the council, did not imply that the doctrine contained in the 
Tome of Leo was an open question. We know they believed 
the doctrine themselves. But there were some amongst those 
who had been led away who needed to have it publicly set 
before them, and the reinstatement of the lapsed but peni- 
tent bishops needed some arrangement which would, says 
Pulcheria, be made 1 on the authority of Leo.' 1 Some shorter 
confession of faith, in accordance with the Tome, was also 
needed, and desired by the Pope, and all this could be effected 
in the council. Pulcheria in the same letter informs the Pope 
with evident joy that the Bishop of Constantinople has sub- 
scribed the Tome ; whilst the emperor had already told Leo 
that he looked to him in the cause of the orthodox faith, 
because he was 1 the bishop and ruler of the divine faith.* * 
This, be it remembered, was one of the holiest emperors, if 
not quite the holiest, that ever ruled at Constantinople. 

XI. Before, however, proceeding to the acts of the council, 
it will be well to consider the circumstances under which 
Anatolius took his seat as Bishop of Constantinople. 

Upon the death of the murdered Flavian the clergy and 
people of Constantinople had elected to the vacant see the 
very person who had acted as secretary to the heretical Arch- 
bishop of Alexandria (Dioscorus), and was in favour with his 
sympathiser, the Emperor Theodosius. The latter had relied 
on him in his ecclesiastical administration, and had probably 
procured his election as archbishop of his capital. Anatolius, 
for that was his name, wrote to Leo announcing his consecra- 
tion. What else he said we do not know. It is not correct 
to say, as Mr. Gore does, 3 that he 4 simply announced his 
consecration, without asking for any consent to it on Leo's 
part ; 9 for his letter, as we have it, is confessedly a frag- 
ment, and St. Leo's letter to the emperor implies that Ana- 

the most holy Bishop of Borne/ are the emperor's words. There was no doub 
in his own mind as to which was the true faith ; and the letters of Leo were 
all written with the view, not of settling, but of enforcing the true faith. 
1 irov atdfVTovrros (Ep. lxxvii.). 

* ixuTKoxtvoxxrav kcl\ Hpxovcrav rrjs dc fa* *-{<rrc«s. 

• Diet, of Chr. Biogr. art. 4 Leo.' 




—462 



LEO DEALT WITH ANATOLIUS 



393 



tolius did ask for Leo's confirmation. What, however, we do 
know that he omitted was a statement as to his teaching; 
he gave no account of his faith. 1 Leo accordingly waited 
some months before answering, and then he wrote, not to 
Anatolius himself, but to the Emperor Theodosius. Now it 
would hardly be possible to give clearer indications of the re- 
lation of sovereignty on the part of the See of St. Peter 
towards the See of Constantinople than are afforded by this 
and some succeeding letters. It must be remembered that 
Leo was writing to the Eastern emperor, who was opposed to 
his condemnation of Eutyches ; he was writing, too, about 
the bishop of that city, which was the very apple of the 
imperial eye. We know that the emperor had avowed the 
sovereignty of the See of St. Peter over all the sees of Chris- 
tendom by his signature to the 1 Constitution * of Valentinian ; 
but this sovereignty of the Apostolic See was now to be ex- 
pressed in a form most calculated to excite that emperor's 
indignation, and to jeopardise the whole position, unless that 
sovereignty were beyond dispute. But in truth the Huns, 
tumultuously crowding into Italy and advancing towards 
Borne, were not more dreadful in the eyes of Leo than the 
incursion of heretics into that vineyard of the Lord, with 
which the Eastern bishops declared him to have been en- 
trusted by the Saviour of the world. 2 The time had come 
when that energetic nature, which had hardly its peer in that 
half-century, must exercise the authority of his position to 
the full. The Divine Majesty of his Lord was at stake. It 
was enough for Leo. 

XII. Now there was just occasion for suspicion as to Ana- 
tolius* teaching. Indeed, his conduct after the synod showed 
that there was a taint of heresy about him, such as Leo 
feared. Accordingly Leo wrote to the emperor, in July 450, 
and praised him for deciding to adhere to the Nicene Creed. 
It was on this point that Theodosius had been misled by the 
Eutychian party. They were for ever proclaiming their ad- 
herence to the Nicene Creed, and made believe that they were 
contending for that creed and for the Ephesine decree. So 
the Pope gives the emperor credit for sincerely believing that 

1 Ep. lxlx. lxxi. * Letter of the Eastern bishops to Leo after Ohaloedon. 



Digitized by 



394 



AS HIS ADMITTED SUPERIOR, 



a.d. 400 



he was acting in defence of the Nicene settlement ; and on 
this ground he expresses his surprise that Anatolius has not 
sent him an account of his faith. Consequently he has de- 
ferred acknowledging him — ' not that he refused his affection, 
hut because he awaited some manifestation of Catholic truth/ 
He says that he is not exacting from him anything but what 
every Catholic would do. He then alludes to their predeces- 
sors' writings as sufficient tests for those who preceded them. 
But they are not enough for themselves under present circum- 
stances. Anatolius is to 'read carefully' 'what the holy 
Fathers have given as guard to the faith in the Incarnation/ 
' and he must understand that what Cyril wrote against Nes- 
torius is consonant with this.* Cyril's letter, says the Pope, 
is a clear exposition of the Nicene definition, and has been 
placed in the archives of the Apostolic See. 1 Anatolius is to 
read carefully the Acts of the Ephesine Synod 2 against Nes- 
torius ; and he is 4 not to disdain to read also my letter, which 
he will find agrees in all things with the Fathers.' 

But this is not all. St. Leo tells the emperor that Ana- 
tolius, having recognised that all this is demanded and ex- 
pected of him, 3 he is to sign the confession of the Common 
Faith, and make a declaration before all the clergy and the 
whole people — a profession of faith which is to be ' publicly 
notified (1) to the Apostolic See, and (2) to all the Lord's 
priests [i.e. bishops] and Churches.' Further, he is to send a 
written statement as soon as possible, plainly (' dilucide ') de- 
claring that if anyone believes or asserts anything else concern- 
ing the Incarnation of the Word of God than what ' the profes- 
sion of all Catholics and my own ' declares, he will separate 
such a one from his communion. And to expedite this im- 
portant matter, he says he is sending four legates, whose 
business it will be * to declare the exact faith which we hold, 
the form of our faith, so that if the Bishop of Constanti- 
nople consents to the same confession of faith, with his whole 
heart, we may feel secure and rejoice in the peace of the 

1 1 Apostolic© Sedis Bcrinia Busceperunt.' 

* * EphesinaB synodi gesta recenseat.' 

* 1 Ezpeti desiderarique *— • desiderari 1 expressing Leo's feeling that some- 
thing of the kind ought to have been done sooner. 




-452 



ENFORCING ON HIM 



395 



Church. If, however, there is any dissent from the purity of 
our faith and the authority of the Fathers, 1 a council must be 
held in Italy, so that it may not be open to anyone to talk 
about the Nicene Creed and yet be in opposition to it. 

Now, had there been an idea that there was the slightest 
dogmatic ground for denying the prerogative thus claimed by 
Leo of dealing with the Archbishop of Constantinople as a 
subject, and of imposing on him the Roman ' form of faith/ 
it is not possible to suppose that either Theodosius or Ana- 
tolius would not have resented this exercise of jurisdiction. 
It would be impossible to imagine a more extreme case. 
There is every circumstance that could emphasise the impos- 
sibility of such a tremendous assumption (if it were an as- 
sumption ') passing muster without a challenge. The arch- 
bishop in question was not naturally disposed either to submit 
quietly to a usurpation for the sake of uniting against a 
common foe, for he had a tender spot in his heart for the 
party of Eutyches ; he was not the occupant of a see which 
had no ambition or no political friends, for it was the Imperial 
see, and was soon about to attempt a rise in the scale of 
patriarchal honour over Alexandria and Antioch. Here, too, 
was an emperor not favourable to Leo and the orthodox party, 
but under the influence of Dioscorus and his friends. Such 
were the circumstances, and they simply preclude the idea that 
there was not ample recognition of the headship of the See of 
St. Peter on which St. Leo could work ; for Leo was neither 
a dullard nor void of care for the faith. He lived for the 
faith, and he knew something of men. 

To Pulcheria St. Leo wrote to exactly the same effect, in- 
sisting that Anatolius must without delay acknowledge the 
'unskilful folly' displayed by the definition of the Robber 
Synod. And the reason he gives is the same as Leo XIH. 
would give under similar circumstances, viz. ' because both my 
confession of faith and that of the holy Fathers 3 concerning 
the Incarnation of the Lord is in all respects a concordant 
and one confession/ 

1 Canon Bright's explanation, 'Leo . . . quietly assume*,' is simply out 
of the question. 

* In each of these letters there is probably a special allusion to the Nicene 
Fathers, with whom Theodosius misled by Eutyches, claimed to be in harmony. 



Digitized by Google 



396 



TERMS OF COMMUNION. 



400 



At the same time be writes to the archimandrites of Con- 
stantinople (a still stronger step in some respects), and com- 
plains of Anatolius having given no sign, as if there had been 
no scandals connected with Constantinople, or 'as if 1 the 
merit of a bishop were not to be demonstrated principally 
from here/ 

Leo seems to have had no fear that he was^placing the 
cause nearest to his heart, the maintenance]of the ' peerless 
sacrament of the faith,' in any jeopardy. If ,ever there was a 
case in which the authority of the Apostolic See needed to 
come forward, it was here, and if ever there was one case 
more than another in which that authority was used with 
holy boldness and singleness of aim, it was this. The result 
was everything that could be wished. Leo wrote in July, 
and at the end of the month Theodosius suddenly died. The 
legates appear to have acted promptly, and in November the 
Empress Pulcheria was able to announce to Leo that ' Ana- 
tolius embraces the apostolical confession of your letters,' and 
has without delay signed the dogmatic epistle to Flavian, 
which she calls ' the letter of the Catholic faith. 1 

XIII. Anatolius' letters to Leo are unfortunately lost. 
Leo answered him 2 and congratulated him, and, after giving 
directions about the reception of such bishopsjas had given 
way at the Latrocinium, he says, ' the favour of communion 
with us is to be neither harshly denied nor rashly bestowed.' 
He says that he had received Eusebius into communion, and 
therefore requests Anatolius to have Eusebius' Church taken 
care of, and desires that all should know that Anatolius has 
been received into communion with Eome, * that those who 
serve our God may rejoice that your peace has been concluded 
with the Apostolic See. 9 He further tells the emperor 3 that he 
has directed the legates to co-operate with Anatolius, and in 
another letter 4 he tells Anatolius that he joins him with them 
in the execution of his decree, 6 and gives his directions about 
the lapsed bishops in general and the leaders in particular. 

1 * Aut non hino praecipue fuerit meritum demonstrandum.' 

2 JSTp. lxxx. • Ep. lxxxiii. 4 Ep. lxxxv. 

5 • Executionem nostra dispositionis.' (CI. the use of dispositio for an im- 
perial edict.) 




—462 



LEO'S TOME SIGNED BY 



397 



As regards the latter, if they repent he 1 reserves ' their case 
' for the maturer counsels of the Apostolic See,' 1 and bids 
Anatolius 4 to strive to execute such things as befit the Church 
of God ' in union with his own legates. 

At the same time, as if, in God's providence, history was 
to settle for those who search it the lines of Papal jurisdiction, 
St. Leo exercised the same authority over the members of the 
Archdiocese of Constantinople that Zozimus did over Africa. 
Two Constantinopolitan priests had repaired to Borne to clear 
themselves of suspicion as to heresy, and Leo sent them back, 
saying that ' at great cost they had opened their hearts to 
[literally in] the Apostolic See, and shown that they receive 
nothing save what we, by the teaching of the Holy Spirit, have 
both learned and teach ; ' and he exhorts Anatolius to assist 
them, as ' being adorned with the favour of Apostolical com- 
munion,' i.e. communion with the Apostolic See. 

It is difficult to imagine a more perfect anticipation of 
Catholic ecclesiastical life in the nineteenth century. And so 
far there is not a solitary protest recorded, not a distant idea 
that St. Leo was doing more than exercising his proper pre- 
rogative in a natural way, and fulfilling the responsibilities of 
his sacred and divinely instituted office. 

XIV. A very important step was now taken by the new 
archbishop. For the second time he called together his 
' home-synod/ 2 and the bishops not merely themselves signed 
the Tome or letter to Flavian, but sent it to the absent 
metropolitans. 

Abundius, the Papal legate, thereupon returned from Con- 
stantinople, and obtained, in accordance with the request 
of Leo, the subscription of the Metropolitan of Milan and his 
synod to the Pope's dogmatic epistle. The same had already 
been obtained from the provinces of Gaul. 

So that this letter to Flavian, which had been suppressed 
at the Robber Council, had now received the signatures of well- 
nigh the whole Christian world. It was issued as an ex cathedra 
pronouncement on the part of the Pope ; it had now been re- 
ceived as the dogmatic expression of Christian belief at Con- 

1 Ibid, c, ii. 

* Consisting of the bishops at and around Constantinople. 




398 



ANATOLIUS AND OTHER BISHOPS, a.d. 400—452 



stantinople, at Antioch, 1 and in the entire West. No bishop 
who had signed it could henceforth treat its teaching as an 
open question ; it only remained to issue a definition in accord- 
ance with it, and to induce the Egyptians to withdraw their 
complicity with Dioscorus and his teaching, and to arrange the 
return of the lapsed but penitent bishops. St. Leo had 
already laid down the conditions of their return, but had 
made an exception in the case of the ringleaders at Ephesus. 
This, however, he also eventually left to the discretion of the 
council on application from Pulcheria. 2 

Such were the circumstances under which Anatolius, the 
Bishop of Constantinople, took his seat at the Council of 
Chalcedon. 



Leonis Ep. civ. 



3 Ep. Ixxxy. 




CHAPTER XXni. 



THE DEPOSITION OP DIOSOORUS. 

I. The great council met, not, as was originally intended, 
at Nicaea, but at Chalcedon, in order that the emperor might 
attend to his imperial affairs and yet be near at hand in 
case of need. And it mast be borne in mind that it was 
summoned for the reversal of the Ephesine catastrophe. The 
Bobber Synod of Ephesus had acquitted Eutyches, and 
grounded its acquittal on his agreement with St. Cyril ; it 
had condemned Flavian, his archbishop, on the false suppo- 
sition that he differed from Cyril, and so from the Nicene 
Fathers. But, on the other hand, St. Leo had confirmed the 
condemnation of Eutyches by the previous Synod of Constan- 
tinople, and there was an end of that matter. His position 
as a heretic was assumed throughout. But the condem- 
nation of Flavian and the pretended agreement of Eutyches 
with St. Cyril had to be dealt with ; and the Patriarch of 
Alexandria had to be condemned, if he continued obdurate to 
the last. St. Leo had cherished hopes of his repentance, and 
accordingly had devolved upon the council the duty of de- 
posing him in case only of his continued obduracy ; in case 
of his repentance the matter would have to be referred again 
to the Apostolic See. 1 

It was not enough, then, for the council to signify its 
adhesion to the Tome of St. Leo. It must also make it plain 
that its adhesion included the clear perception that the two 
great letters of St. Cyril, confirmed by the General Council of 
Ephesus (which included the Pope by representation and by 

1 'Reserved for the matnrer counsels of the Apostolic See ' (Ep. lzzzv.) 



by Google 



400 



WHAT THE COUNCIL HAD TO DO. 



his subsequent confirmation of the Acts) were not in contra- 
diction with the Tome which they subscribed, nor the Tome 
in contradiction with them. 1 

Further, it was left to the council to draw up some short 
definition which would serve as a test of orthodoxy on the 
point in question. St. Leo's Tome was not intended for that ; 
it supplied the rinros? the mould and the material, the neces- 
sary norm and measuring-line, but not a definition adapted 
for practical purposes ; this would be best effected in a coun- 
cil, after an investigation and exposition of the needs of the 
case* 

Again, St. Leo had left it to the council to deal with the 
cases of those bishops who had been illegitimately extruded 
from their sees, and whose cases could now be heard in per- 
son — such as Eusebius and Theodoret ; and the cases of those 
bishops who had subscribed the condemnation of Flavian by 
putting their signatures to a blank paper. 

Such was the work before the council. It met in the 
Church of St. Euphemia, on whose intercessions the bishops 
avowed their reliance, and on whose altar they placed their 
definition, that it might be presented before saints and angels, 
and to Almighty God, by her intercessory mediation. 

There were at least 600 bishops present, the largest 
number that had yet met together. They were, almost to a 
man, Eastern prelates. The scene of their meeting is de- 
scribed in glowing terms by Evagrius, and is to this day one 
of the most exquisite spots in that beautiful region. 

II. Dioscorus at once took his seat as Archbishop of Alexan- 
dria. He had just before gathered together ten bishops and exe- 
cuted the farce of excommunicating St. Leo — an act of madness, 
which eventually afforded the bishops their chief ground for 
deciding upon his impenitence, and in consequence for carry- 

1 It is important to remember this, because some writers, in dealing with 
the exclamations of the bishops daring the council concerning Cyril, seem to 
imagine that they were quoting Cyril simply, as the authority before which 
they bowed ; indeed, they even suppose that the bishops put the authority of 
Cyril on a par with that of Leo. But it was because Cyril's orthodoxy had 
been established by Pope and council, particularly by Celestine and Sixtus (who 
are expressly mentioned — of. fifth session), that his authority is quoted. 

9 Bp. oi. Anatolii ad Leonem. 




—462 



DIOSCORUS AND THEODORET. 



401 



ing out the sentence of Leo, committed to their charge. 
Whether by this means he thought to make it technically 
impossible for the legates to sit and condemn him, or whether 
he acted out of mere bravado, and by way of insult to the 
Apostolic See, it is impossible to say. He now sat down in 
the place of honour, as the occupant of the second see in 
Christendom. 

But the Papal legates intervened, and refused to proceed 
until Dioscorus was removed from the seat he had occupied. 
They wished him to go out. They held a commission (said 
Paschasinus) ' from the most holy and most apostolic Bishop 
of Borne, who is the head of all Churches, to see that Dios- 
corus should have no seat in the council.' When questioned 
further, the legates said that Dioscorus 'had dared to arrange 1 
a synod without leave from the Apostolic throne.' 

The imperial commissioners wished to resist this decision 
of the legates, but in vain. They had to obey 6 the head of all 
Churches,' and cause Dioscorus to leave his place. His pre- 
sence, however, was required, and he was therefore allowed to 
sit in the middle, without, that is to say, a seat as a consti- 
tuent member of the synod, which was the gist of the legates' 
demand. There he maintained that Flavian was rightly con- 
demned by the council which the Emperor Theodosius had 
convoked at Ephesus. His position really was that the 
imperial supremacy was sufficient for the case, and that 
Flavian was involved in heresy. 

Accordingly the Acts of the Bobber Synod were read. In 
these the name of Theodoret occurred, who had been deposed 
by Dioscorus. Theodoret was called for, and he presently 
entered. A scene of tumultuous confusion ensued. The 
Egyptian bishops saw in Theodoret only the enemy of St. 
Cyril. They shouted and protested, and maintained that to 
admit Theodoret into the assembly was to cast out Cyril, 
whom Theodoret had once anathematised. The statement, 
which the commissioners and senate made, that Leo had rein- 

1 Toifjcat, I have translated the word * arrange,' as being a term which is 
both covered by the Greek word, and which fits in with the facts of the case. 
St. Leo had sent legates, bnt Dioscorus took precedence of them by order of the 
emperor, or with his consent. This was his sin in the matter. 



D D 




402 



THE ALEXANDRIAN PATRIARCH 



a.d. 400 



stated him in his bishopric, and that the emperor had ordered 
his presence, availed nothing for awhile with these Egyptian 
partisans. They were furious at the idea of one who had 
anathematised their former holy patriarch, appearing in the 
council in the character of bishop. They cared for neither 
Pope or emperor, nor for the Patriarch of Antioch, who had 
likewise testified to the orthodoxy of Theodoret ; they believed 
them all to be unaware of the true character of the man. 
They were calmed, however, by the compromise of admitting 
his presence on the understanding that his sitting as accuser 
should not prejudice the question of his proper place in the 
synod, which could be settled afterwards, as was in fact done 
in Theodorets favour. 

The pith of the accusation now brought against Dioscorus 
lay in the fact that he had suppressed the Tome of Leo; 
and he persisted throughout that Flavian was rightly con- 
demned, because he had said that * after the union ' (i.e. the 
Incarnation) ' there were two natures in Christ.' Dioscorus 
and his party were willing to acknowledge that Christ was 
* of two natures/ but not that there * are two natures ' in 
Him. 1 

The obduracy, therefore, of Dioscorus being duly esta- 
blished, it only remained to pronounce sentence, in accord- 
ance with St. Leo's direction, in canonical form — which, how- 
ever, was deferred for another session. The Oriental bishops, 
i.e. those in the patriarchate of Antioch, were in favour of all 
the leaders of the Bobber Synod being included in the con- 
demnation of Dioscorus, but on the Hlyrian bishops exclaim- 
ing, 'We have all erred: we all ask for pardon,' it was 
decided, for the present, that Dioscorus alone should suffer 
deposition. 

When the bishops reassembled, neither Dioscorus nor the 
imperial commissioners made their appearance ; the latter, 
because the deposition of a bishop was so completely the affair 
of the spiritualty, and the former, doubtless, because he had 
clearly seen how things were going. Eusebius of Dorylaeum, 
who had been ' deposed' by the Robber Synod, now preferred 



1 Mann, t. vi. p. 690. 




-452 



DEPOSED AT THE SYNOD 



403 



his complaint against Dioscorns, and the latter was accordingly 
summoned in the usual way to attend the synod. Meanwhile, 
three clerics of Alexandria and a layman were admitted to the 
synod, to prefer their several complaints against their patri- 
arch. These petitions were each one of them addressed ' to 
the (Ecumenical Archbishop and Patriarch of great Rome, Leo, 
and to the holy and (Ecumenical Synod.' They revealed the 
fact that Dioscorns was a man of notoriously loose morality 
and intolerably overbearing temper. The priest from Alex- 
andria concluded by saying to the bishops, 'I, miserable 
Athanasius, presbyter of the most renowned city of Alexandria, 
have presented these petitions to the most holy (Ecumenical 
Archbishop and Patriarch Leo, and to the most holy (Ecume- 
nical Council of holy Fathers and Bishops.' The layman 
Sophronius concluded in the same way. 1 These petitions, 
thus addressed, were ordered to be inserted in the Acts, and 
read to Dioscorns in case he came to the synod. But Dios- 
corns, like Nestorius, refused to obey the summons, saying 
that he * adhered to what he had previously said,' thus con- 
fessing his obstinate perseverance, and bringing himself under 
the condemnation of Leo. 

HE. The sentence was forthwith pronounced by Pascha- 
sinus, at the desire of the bishops. Julian, Bishop of Hypepae, 
not merely concurred with the rest in calling on Paschasinus 
to give the sentence, but made the following short speech : — 
' Holy fathers, listen. Since in the metropolis of Ephesus 
Dioscorns held the authority ' (from the emperor) ' for judging 
between holy Flavian and the most religious Bishop Eusebius ' 
(on the one hand) ' and Eutyches' (on the other), 'and issued 
a thoroughly iniquitous judgment, himself first pronouncing 
an unjust sentence, and then forcing the rest to follow him — 
now your holiness holds the authority of the most holy Leo ; 
and all the holy synod, gathered together according to the 
will of God and the decree of our most pious emperor knows, 

1 Mr. Gore (Did. of Chr. Biog. p. 668) alludes to these addresses as the 
* expressions of individuals,* as though they were nothing further. It must be 
remembered that these petitioners were endeavouring to ingratiate themselves, 
not with St. Leo, but with the council, and that the council was prepared to 
use their petitions as evidence. The context makes their use emphatic 



d d 2 




404 



BY THE AUTHORITY OF 



a.d. 400 



as does your holiness, all that was done in Ephesus; and 
Dioscorus has been thrice summoned and would in no wise 
obey. We ask your holiness, therefore, who holds, or rather 
your holinesses ' (i.e. the other legates), ' who hold the place of 
the most holy Pope Leo, to promulgate and issue against him 9 
(viz. Dioscorus) ' the sentence contained in the canons. For 
we all, and the whole oecumenical synod, are of one mind 
with your holiness. 9 

The whole assembly reiterated its perfect oneness of mind 
with Paschasinus. 

Let us pause for a moment. The whole enormous 
assembly of Eastern bishops can hear St. Leo addressed by 
the Alexandrian clerics as the ' oecumenical 9 archbishop par 
excellence, and not a word of protest, but the letters are placed 
in the archives for use in the tremendous scene that is being 
now enacted— nothing less than the deposition of the occupant 
of the second see in Christendom. 

Again, the deposition of the Patriarch of Alexandria is 
yielded by the synod to the legates on the ground that they 
hold the authority of Leo. The authority of the synod in 
Ghalcedon is said to differ from that of the synod of Ephesus 
under Dioscorus, in deriving from the Bishop of Borne, 
who, through his legates, is present at the synod, and 
forms a constituent necessary and sovereign element of that 
assembly. 

Nothing in the life of the Church could require a more 
sovereign act of jurisdiction than the deposition of the Arch- 
bishop of Alexandria. St. Athanasius tells us how St. Julius 
in the last century said that the canons required that all 
matters concerning the deposition of an Alexandrian arch- 
bishop should be referred to Borne, that 'a just judgment 
may be issued thence. 9 St. Athanasius, Bishop of Alexandria, 
had been deposed by a synod with the authority of the 
emperor. But the Pope treated the deposition as null and 
void, reopened the question, and acquitted Athanasius. In 
the case of Dioscorus, a Bishop of Alexandria was now 
being deposed, and the whole Church accepted his deposition. 
But he was deposed by the authority of the See of St. 
Peter, whose agent was the synod of bishops, including the 




—452 



THE APOSTOLIC SEE. 



406 



representative of the Apostolic See. If anyone doubts 
this, let him ponder the following sentence, adopted by the 
council. 1 

Paschasinus, Lucentius (bishops), and Boniface (priest), 
* holding * (as the Acts say) * the place of the most holy and 
blessed Leo, Archbishop of the Apostolic See of great and 
older Borne,' stood up and pronounced the sentence of deposi- 
tion on the following grounds : 

1. 'Because Dioscorus on his own authority received Euty- 
ch.es, of one mind with him, into communion when he had 
been canonically condemned by his own archbishop * — ' this 
he did before he sat in council with the bishops at Ephesus.' 

2. 'The Apostolic See has pardoned the other bishops.' 
They acted under compulsion, and they have repented and 
have ' continued to adhere 2 to the most holy Archbishop Leo 
and the holy and (Ecumenical Council.' (How could the 
'Apostolic See ' be said by an oecumenical synod to have ' par- 
doned' bishops, unless that synod held that the said see 
represented 'the prince and head of the Apostles'? And 
what obedience could Eastern bishops owe to Leo, except on 
the supposition that he was the ' oecumenical archbishop ' ?) 

But Dioscorus ' has continued to boast over those things 
on account of which he ought to groan and throw himself on 
to the ground.' (So that his obstinacy, which Leo mentioned 
as necessary to be established before he was finally con- 
demned, was substantiated.) 

8. He did not allow the Tome of Leo to be read — ' which 
not being read, the Holy Churches of God throughout the 
world have suffered scandal and injury.' (Notice the relation 
of the Papal utterance to the whole Church of God.) 

All this, however (they say), might have been pardoned. 
But this was not all. The climax was reached when — 

4. ' He presumed to issue an excommunication against the 
most holy and blessed Archbishop of Greater Borne.' 

5. Lastly, he had rendered himself technically liable to 
deposition, for he refused to appear when thrice summoned 
to a synod. (St. Athanasius also refused to appear when 
summoned to a synod ; but it had been convoked by the 

1 Mansi, t. vi. p. 1046. 9 Mimpw. 




406 



THE SENTENCE ITSELF. 



a.p. 400 



emperor without the consent of the Pope, as the Eastern 
historians notice in condemning it.) 

' Wherefore Leo, the most holy and blessed Archbishop of 
great and older Rome, by us and by the present holy synod, 
together with the thrice blessed and worthy of all praise, the 
blessed Apostle Peter, who is the rock and foundation of the 
Catholic Church, and the foundation of the orthodox faith, 
has stripped him of his episcopate and deprived him of all 
sacerdotal dignity. Wherefore this great synod will decree 
what is according to the canons.' 

Anatolius signed first, saying that ' he agreed in all things 
with the Apostolic throne/ Dioscorus had disobeyed the 
canons of the holy Fathers and had refused to obey the three- 
fold summons. 

Maximus of Antioch recorded his agreement with Leo 
and Anatolius. 

Diogenes, Bishop of Cyzicum, ' consented to those things 
which had been decreed by the most holy and blessed Roman 
Archbishop Leo,' and by Anatolius and the present holy and 
oecumenical synod. 

One bishop calls the meeting ' your angelical meeting.' 

In the version of this sentence which Leo himself sent to 
the Gallic bishops the indictment against Dioscorus that he 
had * excommunicated ' the Pope is omitted, as was natural ; 
otherwise the differences are purely verbal. 1 

The sentence, however, as communicated to Dioscorus, 
did not give the bishops' reasons in full, but merely mentioned 
the technical point of his disobedience to the summons of the 
synod, besides ' his other offences.' 

But in their official report to the emperor, 2 which is of the 
highest importance, they give the grounds of their condem- 
nation in full. 

First, Dioscorus had prevented the Pope's letter to Flavian 
being read at Ephesus. 

Next, he had restored Eutyches, ' sick with the impiety 
of the Manichseans,' to his priesthood and position in hia 

1 Mr. Gore calls this version ' widely different.' Bat a comparison of the 
two line by line will convince the reader that this is not correct. 

2 Mansi, t. vi. p 1098. 




—462 



THE SYNOD'S REPORT. 



407 



monastery 1 after the Bishop of Rome had decreed what was 
fitting, and had condemned the perfidy of Eutyches in 
saying, " I confess, indeed, that our Lord Jesus Christ was of 
(itc) two natures before the union, but that there was one 
nature after the union." ' 

The quotation is from the Tome of Leo, and shows that 
they understood the latter part of the Tome as a juridical 
sentence. Dioscorus had seen this sentence which the Pope 
parsed on Eutyches, and had suppressed the Tome in which 
it occurs. 

Thirdly, his misconduct to Eusebius of Dorylseum was 
scandalous. 

Fourthly, he had received into communion those who 
had been put out of communion, thereby offending against 
the canon which 'teaches that those who are excommuni- 
cated by one should not be received into communion with 
others.' 

But all this (the synod says) might have been forgiven; 
in fact, the Pope had expressly said that a door of repentance 
was to be left to the last. But Dioscorus (probably just 
before the council actually met) gathered together ten bishops 
and induced them to execute the farce of excommunicating 
St. Leo himself. This was the climax of his madness. And 
so the synod continues to report to his Imperial Majesty by 
saying that — 

Fifthly, ' beyond all this, he has also opened his mouth 
like a mad dog against the Apostolic See itself, and has 
endeavoured to effect letters of excommunication against the 
most holy and blessed Pope Leo, and — 

Lastly, 1 has persisted in his iniquities and been obstinate 
against the holy and oecumenical synod, refusing to answer to 
various accusations brought against him.' 

He remains, therefore (so they wrote to the Empress 
Fulcheria), 'a pillar of salt, and the rulers of the various 
Churches have regained their sees, Christ our Lord having 
prosperously directed their course, Who shows the truth in 
the wonderful Leo — for as He used the sapient Peter, so He 
uses also this champion of the truth' ( f ita et isto utitur 
assertore '), viz. Leo. 




408 



THE MATTER OF FAITH 



A.D. 400 



Such is the verdict of the great Eastern Synod, viz. that 
St. Peter is the rock in 'Matt, xvi., 1 and that Leo takes the 
place, in the Church's government of souls, of the blessed 
Apostle Peter, being the Vicar of Christ in his direction 
of the Church — a statement which is correctly summed up 
in the more modern phrase ' Papal supremacy,' or ' infalli- 
bility.' 

IV. In the session which followed, the imperial commis- 
sioners, who, although not presidents in the ecclesiastical sense 
of the term, arranged the external order of the assembly, 
brought forward the question of the faith in which the body of 
bishops were now to proclaim their unity. Dioscorus, if this 
is the third session, had now been deposed, and the case of his 
assistants in the Eobber Council — viz. Juvenal of Jerusalem 
and four other bishops — had yet to be dealt with. None of 
these were present at this session. The business before the 
bishops was, according to the commissioners, that of 1 ex- 
pounding the faith purely ; ' and the object in view was that 
4 those who seem not to have held the same ideas as all the 
rest should be brought back to unity of mind by tht full know- 
ledge (iirbyvoHTw) of the truth, for the lord of the earth holds, 
as we do, the faith handed down by the 818 Fathers at Nicsea, 
and the 150, and by the rest of the most holy and glorious 
Fathers.' 

This description of the business before the meeting is of 
great importance for understanding what follows. It was the 
' pure faith ' which was to bind the bishops together ; and the 
commissioners themselves had no doubt as to what that pure 
faith was. It was no open question. Those who were to be 
1 brought back ' were the bishops who had acquitted Eutyches 
and condemned Flavian, asserting that Flavian had contra- 
vened and Eutyches had accepted the Nicene Creed. By 
voting for the condemnation of Flavian they had seemed to 
hold ideas which were at variance with the meaning of the 
Nicene Creed, as interpreted by the Council of Ephesus and 
by Leo. But the emperor (said the commissioners) held to 
the Nicene and Constantinopolitan Creed as interpreted by 
the present Pope. 



1 Cf . the 4 Sentence ' above, p. 406. 




—462 



SETTLED BY LEO. 



409 



On the mention of the emperor's faith in the Nicene 
Creed, all agreed by acclamation that they held no other faith 
than that of Nicaea, Constantinople, and Ephesus. 

So far all was well ; but a Eutychian could say that. 
Accordingly, Cecropius of Sebastopol rose and introduced the 
real subject before them. He said that besides these declara- 
tions of faith, the matter concerning Eutyches had arisen, 
and that a dogmatic decision had been given by the most holy 
archbishop in Eome, ' And we follow him, and have all sub- 
scribed his letter.' 

The bishops exclaimed, 'We all say this: the exposi- 
tions given are sufficient; it is not in our power to make 
another.' 

This is a crucial point in estimating the position which 
St. Leo's letter occupied in their minds. It stood on a level 
with those writings which had been accepted by the previous 
councils. It had not been synodically discussed; it never 
was. The bishops from the first refused to discuss its con- 
tents in open synod. They followed Leo. They had signed 
his letter, and that was enough. They maintained that it 
was not open to them to make another exposition. It had 
not yet been synodically accepted, but they still had no cause 
to frame another exposition. 1 

But as Eusticus in the next century annotates the bishops' 
acclamation, it was not the case that quite all the bishops were 
satisfied with this. The great majority were of one mind, but 
it could not be taken for granted that every one of them was 
agreed with the rest. Accordingly the commissioners pro- 
posed that the patriarchs of each of the provinces should, with 
one or two from each province, pass into the middle and de- 
liberate in common concerning the faith, so that if there 
should be any difference of opinion, which they thought there 
could not be, that difference might be clearly expressed. 

The bishops, however, refused to do this. They were 
satisfied with things as they were. They flatly refused to 
make out any written formulary, for those already in exist- 
ence were sufficient. They had already agreed to Cecropius' 

1 It was (they said) Leo's sentence (r<nro%) which made it unnecessary. 
Jlansi, vi. 953. 




410 



THE TOME COMPARED WITH 



a.d. 400 



statement that the Pope's dogmatic interpretation sufficed for 
the Eutychian matter. 

Y. Bat Florentius of Sardes pleaded that * a certain time 
should be given so that we may approach the truth of the 
matter with becoming consideration, although most certainly 
as concerns ourselves, who have subscribed the letter of the 
most holy Leo, we do not need setting right.' 

He considered, and very properly, after the circumstances 
of the Bobber Council, that some did need setting right, but 
not those who had subscribed to the letter of Leo. 

Gecropius, accordingly, proposed that the decisions of the 
318 Fathers and of the most holy Leo be read. He prefaced 
his proposal by saying that ' the faith has been well discussed 
by the 818 holy Fathers, and has been confirmed by the holy 
Fathers Athanasius, Cyril, Celestine, Hilary, Basil, Gregory, 
and now again by the most holy Leo.' 

It may be noticed that Leo is here said to have ' con- 
firmed' the faith confessed by the Nicene Fathers, which 
shows that nothing can be argued from the council being 
said to confirm the letter of Leo as to its thinking itself a 
superior court. St. Leo was not superior to the Nicene faith, 
nor the synod to Leo. In each case the meaning of the word 
' confirmation ' must be determined by the context. It will 
be seen that the final confirmation by Leo was certainly that 
of a superior authority. 

The Nicene Creed was read, and amongst the exclamations 
that burst from the bishops were such as 'Pope 1 Leo so 
believes ! ' ' Cyril so believes ! ' The great point in their minds 
was that the condemnation of Eutyches did not involve the 
condemnation of Cyril, and that, therefore, in signing the 
Tome of Leo they were not disagreeing with what the Church 
had already taught through St. Cyril. 

Two letters of Cyril were then read; the first on the 
ground that it had been confirmed by the Council of Ephesus, 
and the second, to John of Antioch, had as a matter of fact 
been sanctioned by Pope and emperor and the whole Church. 

1 6 ndxas, the Pope (Mansi, t. vi. p. 955). I do not lay streBs on the definite 
article, but the occurrence of the word by way of contrast. Cyril was also a 
pope, bat they do not call him so here. 




—462 



CYRIL'S AUTHORISED LETTERS. 



411 



After this the bishops again cried oat that ' This is the 
faith of Leo, the archbishop — Leo thus beheves — Leo and 
Anatolius thus believe ! ' No one who considers the circum- 
stances under which Anatolius signed the Tome of Leo will 
for a moment suppose that Anatolius is placed on a level with 
Leo by saying that they believed alike. 

They further cried out, ' As did Cyril, so do we all believe ! ' 
and 'Leo the archbishop thus thinks, thus believes, thus 
wrote ! ' The whole contention of the Eutychians had been 
that they were following Cyril, whose letters had been adopted 
by the whole Church. The orthodox bishops were, therefore, 
anxious to emphasise the fact that in subscribing to Leo's 
teaching they, too, were not divorcing themselves from the 
doctrine of Cyril. They believed both. If they had been 
asked, Is it likely, is it possible that Leo under the circum- 
stances could have led them astray, and differed from those 
writings of Cyril which had received oecumenical sanction ? 
they would doubtless have replied that it was impossible. 
But this was not the question before them. They were only 
dealing with the truth, that as a matter of fact St. Leo did 
not contradict Cyril. And they no more sat in judgment on 
the Pope and St. Cyril as superiors than a man acts as 
superior to St. James and St. Paul when he declares that 
they do not contradict one another in their doctrine of justifi- 
cation ; neither do they put St. Leo on the same official level 
as St. Cyril by mentioning them together, any more than a 
man would equalise St. Paul the Apostle and a Greek poet, if 
he showed that the Apostle agreed with the poet. It must 
be remembered, too, that St. Cyril's writings had Papal 
sanction. 

The Tome of Leo was now read. At two points, such was 
the stupidity of some of the bishops of Illyricum and Palestine 
(who had been exposed to adverse influences) that they could 
not see how the words of the Tome could be reconciled with 
St. Cyril's teaching. They did not say that the Tome was 
wrong, but they did not see their way to reconcile the two. 1 

1 Their difficulty was, doubtless, to distinguish the two concepts of 4 nature ' 
and 4 person/ especially as their relationship had been expressed in Latin, and 
had to be translated into Greek. Members of the Church of England may 




412 



SOME BISHOPS COULD NOT 



a.d. 400 



Aetius the archdeacon ventured to show the bishops that 
they had forgotten two passages in St. Cyril, and Theo- 
doret quoted to them some words of the saint. They were 
satisfied that they were mistaken. At the end of the 
reading the bishops exclaimed, 'This is the faith of the 
Fathers! This is the faith of the Apostles! . . . Peter 
has thus spoken by Leo! The Apostles thus taught! Cyril 
thus taught! ... As Catholics we hold this! . . . Why 
were not these things read at Ephesus ? Dioscorus concealed 
these things.' 

The commissioners and senate asked, ' After all this, who 
doubts ? ' 

The bishops replied, • No one doubts.' They saw, then, in 
Leo's dogmatic epistle the teaching of the Apostles, but 
specially of the Apostle Peter. They refused to examine the 
contents of the letter in synod which they had already sub- 
scribed out of synod, but persisted that they heard in it the 
voice of Peter speaking through Leo, and explaining his own 
confession of faith at Csesarea Philippi. It is not to be sup- 
posed that they used the expression « Peter hath spoken by 
Leo ' without reference to the teaching then in vogue, and 
actually emphasised in this very council, that Leo was the 
successor of Peter. The question before them was not, indeed, 
whether the successor of Peter could be untrue to the teaching 
of Peter ; they were simply asserting that as a matter of fact 
he was true to the Apostle's teaching. But their exclama- 
tion suggests their belief that it followed from his official 
position. 

But although no single voice was raised to break the force 
of the unanimous cry which rose from the bishops, ' We all 
believe ! ' and * No one doubts ! ' and 4 Peter hath spoken by Leo !' 
still there was something more needed; for they had not 
merely to believe, but to understand, since they had to meet 
their former friends, the bishops who had led them at the 
Robber Synod. They were absent now ; but their case had 
to be dealt with — and amongst these was the patriarch of the 
Palestinian bishops. If this was the second session, and 

remember the difficulties felt by Dean Stanley even in this century on the 
same subject, when he was endeavouring to suppress the Athanasian Creed. 




--452 



UNDERSTAND THE TOME. 



413 



Dioscorus was not yet condemned, as the order given by 
Mansi indicates, then they must have been in the utmost need 
of being well prepared to face Dioscorus, as well as the other 
ringleaders of the Latrocinium. But if (as so many old 
copies give the order, and as the Ballerini hold) this was the 
session immediately after the deposition of Dioscorus, they 
had still to reckon with the other bishops, to say nothing of 
their own flocks. And some shorter formulary, some con- 
densed form of the Tome, would have to be provided for prac- 
tical use ; and they would need to have the teaching of Leo 
thoroughly in hand to know how to comport themselves in 
the coming trial. 

Accordingly Atticus of Nicopolis asked for a concession 
of five days, so that they might decide upon this. They 
especially asked to be supplied with the letter of Cyril, con- 
taining the twelve anathematisms which had not been read 
to them, but on which their opponents outside had laid the 
greatest stress. They say, * The letter of our lord 1 and holy 
Father and Archbishop, Leo, who adorns the Apostolic See, 
has been read to us,' and the expression implies that they 
receive that without question. But they wish for the other 
letter of Cyril's. Why? That they may settle their own 
judgment as to the orthodoxy of Leo ? By no means. But 
* that we may be properly provided in the time of closer ex- 
amination.' 

Many of the bishops then proposed that they should all 
look into this together. The commissioners agreed to an 
interval of five days, during which those bishops who wished 
might meet at the house of Anatolius and treat in common, 
out of synod, concerning the faith, ' that those who doubt may 
be taught.' Those who doubt were not allowed to meet for 
mere discussion, but for instruction. 

The word ' doubt ' seems to have roused the bishops, and 
they disclaimed against there being such a thing as doubt in 
the matter. ' We all believe as Leo ; ' ' No one of us doubts ; r 
4 We have already subscribed.' 

The commissioners then explained that it was not meant 

1 One article governs them all. Hence the translation I have given in 
the text. Mansi, vii. 974. 




414 



THEY DID NOT DOUBT LEO, 



a.d. 400 



for them all to meet together. ' Bat since it is fitting to 
persuade all who doubt, let Anatolius choose from amongst 
those who have subscribed such as he thinks fitted to instruct 
such as doubt.' 

It was not, then, the council that discussed the contents of 
the Tome in synod, but some of the bishops, who, from diffi- 
culties of language, and as the event proved, lack of acquaint- 
ance with Cyril's teaching, were willing to be 'instructed' 
in the house of Anatolius between the sessions. They had 
signed a blank paper at the Bobber Council in fear of their 
lives. They would be asked by others in Chalcedon and by 
their flocks at home, whether they understood what they 
signed now. If they replied that they did not understand, 
but simply accepted everything on the word of Leo, they 
would, indeed, have done homage to a truth in owning alle- 
giance to St. Peter in his successor; but what was then 
needed was not an act of faith in the infallibility of the Vicar 
of Christ, but an intelligent adhesion to his dogmatic decree, 
such as was necessary for those who had to teach. The 
Fathers of the synod did, indeed, in writing to the emperor on 
this very subject, bestow unlimited praise on the faith which 
in some did not need any discussion. ' To those who believe, 
a perception not submitted to discussion ' 1 suffices ' for the 
useful purposes of faith, drawing the devout soul to confess 
the holy dogma.' But these bishops could not really say they 
believed with an intelligent faith, when they did not thoroughly 
understand the agreement between Cyril and Leo, although 
they assumed its existence ; having a difficulty in grasping the 
coincidence of teaching by reason of the different languages in 
which the several letters were written. That this was the 
principle on which the hesitating bishops acted is rendered 
quite certain by what they said in the following session. 
After the legates had described the attitude of the synod 
towards the Tome of Leo as being precisely the same as their 
attitude towards the Council of Nice and the Council of 
Ephesus, and after the bishops as a body had accepted this as 
their position, 2 the bishops of Blyricum made a declaration in 
the person of one of their number named Sozon. They said 

1 1 Indisoossa.' * Man si, t. vii. p. 10. 




—452 



BUT NEEDED INSTRUCTION. 



415 



that their hesitation had not proceeded from any doubt as to 
the orthodoxy of Leo. 1 The only question was whether one 
or two expressions conveyed the sense which they were quite 
persuaded was intended by the ' Holy Father.' The legates 
had elucidated (' nobis dilucidaverunt ') the matter. It is there- 
fore beyond dispute that the examination of the Tome was 
not in their minds connected with the idea of revision but of 
elucidation. 

St. Leo expressly alludes to this scene in the synod with 
satisfaction. He speaks of the danger of their consent being 
a mere mechanical and pretended assent, 2 and consequently 
welcomes the news that some doubted about his * judgments.' 
He reckons it a misfortune on their part, and, in the case of 
some doubts on the part of the ringleaders at the Latrocinium, 
calls it an evil thing, and due to the instigation of * the author 
of dissension,' but rejoices that evil was overruled for good, 
for it removed all suspicion of an unreasoning, unintelligent 
adhesion having been given by the other sees * to that one 
which the Lord of All has appointed to preside over the rest.' 
He says that the net result was that what Almighty ' God had 
previously defined by our ministry,' He confirmed ' by the 
irreversible assent of the whole brotherhood,' i.e. of bishops. 
It was already, as it came from his own pen, irreversible ; for 
he says it was that which ' God had defined,' but it was further 
strengthened by the irreversible sentence of the episcopate. 
That sentence, it must be remembered, contained within it 
the Pope by representation, his legates being a constituent 
part of it, and it needed his further confirmation. Further 
on he says that 1 truth shines more brightly, and is more 
strongly held, when what faith had first taught examination 
has afterwards confirmed.' It was already of faith ; but it 
received an accession of strength within the soul, when the 
* fides quaerens intellectum ' had enabled that understanding 
to sit in its light. 

The examination, then, of the Tome of St. Leo accorded 

1 Mansi, t. vii. p. 80. They say the language is obscure. & y fpdais liiarar 
$vItt*to. It was a translation. 
9 Leonis Ep. ozz. ad Theod. 




416 



FREE TO EXAMINE, NOT DISSENT. 



a.d. 400 



to these less enlightened bishops was an investigation for the 
purposes of elucidation, not of revision. No orthodox 
Christian could seriously maintain that any of the bishops 
were free to revise that dogmatic letter. They were free to 
examine, but not to reject. Freedom of dissent would indeed 
be fatal to the infallibility of the Holy See ; the liberty of 
examining, and turning a blind obedience into an intelligent 
adhesion, in no way derogates from her position of authority. 
It does but secure that ' the members should agree with the 
head/ to use the words of St. Leo, by an enlightened and not 
merely a blind faith. 

A palmary instance of such examination occurs in history 
soon after this — after the council had passed its sentence 
and promulgated its definition under anathema. Its decision 
was thep, in the eyes of bishops and of Pope, irreversible. 
And yet, at the request of the emperor Leo, the Eutychians 
were allowed to re-examine the synodical sentence. In the 
case of those who after such examination gave in their 
adhesion, the council was considered to be confirmed anew, 
not by a superior authority, but by the additional judgment 
of concurring bishops. Those who refused adhesion were 
counted as heretics. They were free to examine, but not to 
refuse obedience. And we have only to ask ourselves what 
would have happened if these bishops at Chalcedon had 
refused to listen to the teaching of Anatolius, and withheld 
their subscription to the Tome of Leo, to see that they, too, 
were free to examine, but not to dissent, and that their 
approval was not that of superiors, but the submission of 
subordinates. There is not the slightest trace in the actual 
evolution of the synod's action at Chalcedon of any approval 
as of superiors. The contrary appears quite clearly in the 
fifth session. The Tome of Leo would have remained the 
charter of the Christian faith precisely as much if they had 
disagreed. As a matter of fact, it was involved in the pro- 
mise of Christ to His Church, that the episcopate should 
sooner or later adhere as members to their head. One Dios- 
corus was as much as the Church could bear at that time, 
and one victory over the truth, such as the Bobber Synod, all 
that Christ willed to allow to the prince of darkness in a 




—452 



DIFFICULTIES CLEARED UP. 



417 



single period. And consequently the bishops in the next 
session subscribed their assent to the letter of Leo as a symbol 
agreeing, in point of fact (as, indeed, it was bound to do by 
reason of the Petrine privilege of the Apostolic See) with the 
faith of Nicaea. They did not say the Vicar of Christ has 
exercised his prerogative of infallibility (these are modern 
terms) ; but the thing was there. 

Anatolius, who signed first, said that the 150 Fathers at 
Constantinople had ' confirmed ' the faith of Nicsea. In that 
same sense he might have said that the 600 Fathers of Chal- 
cedon confirmed the Tome of Leo. In neither case was it the 
confirmation of a superior authority, but an exhibition of the 
oneness of the Church's faith. 

The Illyrian bishops said that they found the explanation 
of the legates about the passage they could not understand, 
nor reconcile with what Cyril taught, helpful and sufficient. 1 
And as when some asked of the Apostle Peter how he could 
reconcile his action with the teaching of the Apostle James and 
others, he — all apostle as he was — condescended to explain 
his conduct, and forthwith they acquiesced (r\<Tvya<rav) , so 
here these bishops, after due explanation, signed the letter of 
the Apostolic See, saying they were fully assured of its agree- 
ment with all previous standards of the Christian faith. They 
did not by this means judge Anatolius, who had signed long 
ago, nor the whole of the council, nor its head, St. Leo ; they 
simply recorded their intelligent submission. Any instructed 
Christian might say ' this or that ex cathedra pronouncement 
of the Holy See agrees of necessity with all previous ex cathedra 
utterances ; but for my part I do not see that it does, though 
I am bound to believe it. I should like to see as well as 
believe— I should like to ' believe and know.' 

There was nothing more than this in what took place at 
this session in the case of orthodox bishops in regard to 
St. Leo's dogmatic epistle to Flavian. 

In 1845 some remarkable words fell from the lips of 
Dr. Dollinger, in addressing a company of savants as an 
historian at Munich : • Gentlemen, the question is this : It is 
true that the infallibility of the Pope is not a dogma defined 



1 Mansi, t. vii. p. 31. 



E E 




418 



RESULTS. 



a.d. 400—462 



by the Church ; yet anyone who should maintain the contrary 
would put himself in opposition to the conscience of the whole 
Church, in the present as in the past/ 1 

It is this that results from our study of the Council of 
ChaJcedon. The conscience of the whole Church was pene- 
trated through and through with that conception of the Pope's 
relation to the rest of the episcopate which has been defined 
only twenty years, but believed in for eighteen centuries and 



And yet the 'Dictionary of Christian Biography* can 
admit to its columns the following sentence by Mr. Gore : — 
* It will be seen, then, that Leo's letter was treated by the 
council like the letter of any highly respected Churchman ' ! 
(Art. Leo, p. 668.) 

1 Cf. Christianity and Infallibility. Longmans, 1891. P. 245. 



a half. 




CHAPTEE XXIV. 



THE DEFINITION OF FAITH. 



Bishop Hefele has remarked concerning the fifth session 
of the Council of Chalcedon, that it is ' one of the most im- 
portant in Christian antiquity.' 

In his Tome or letter to Flavian, Leo had censured the 
Synod of Constantinople for passing by the expression which 
Eutychesused in its presence, saying, 'I confess that our Lord 
was of two natures before the union, but I confess one nature 
after the union.' # 

In the discussions of this fifth session everything turned 
on this expression. As Neander said, ' The " in two natures," 
or " of two natures," was the turning-point of the whole con- 
troversy between monophysitism and dyophysitism.' Ana- 
tolius and others were prepared to accept the expression * of 
two natures/ giving to it their own meaning, but not denying 
the coexistence of the two natures after the union at Nazareth. 
With Eutyches the expression was meant to exclude their co- 
existence. 

On October 22 the bishops met, without the senators, who 
were not needed on the matter of faith. The imperial com- 
missioners were present as usual to manage the business part 
of the meeting. 

It was known that the bishops who had met in Anatolius' 
house had drawn up a formula, and it seems that the Papal 
legates were more or less acquainted with its contents. The 
commissioners accordingly ordered the formulary in question 
to be read, which was done by Asclepiades, Deacon of Con- 
stantinople. It had been drawn up at least in concert with 
Juvenal of Jerusalem and Thalassius of Ciesarea, who had 
been the offenders at the Eobber Synod, and probably by 
Anatolius himself, Archbishop of Constantinople now, but with 



■ ■ 2 




420 



THE BISHOPS IN DANGER. 



a.d. 400 



antecedents of sympathy with Dioscorus, whose secretary he 
had been during the persecution of Flavian. 

The formula contained the expression 'of two natures/ 
It was at once objected to by the Bishop of Germanicia, but 
defended by Anatolius, and the clamorous approval of a mass 
of bishops filled the church. It was one of those crises in the 
history of the Church at which, as in a critical passage in the 
denouement of a well-drawn plot, one involuntarily stops to 
take breath. Who could stem the tide of secret sympathy 
with Eutychian teaching which was again setting in ? The 
bishops clamoured for the insertion of the expression ' Mother 
of God ' in the Greed. They were still possessed of the idea 
that somehow orthodox teaching concerning the ' two natures ' 
in Christ involved the heresy of Nestorius — which spoke of 
' two persons ' in the Incarnate Word. The Papal legates now 
stepped forward and condemned the proposed definition (tvttos); 
they announced their determination to quit the scene unless 
the letter of Leo was strictly adhered to. The bishops, how- 
ever, still clamoured in favour of their own formula. The 
commissioners endeavoured to calm the meeting by drawing 
their attention to the fact that the term which they had in- 
serted in their definition, viz. 4 of two natures/ might be 
understood in an heretical sense, since Dioscorus had con- 
demned Flavian for using the opposite expression 'in two 
natures' of our Incarnate Lord. Anatolius replied that 
Dioscorus was not condemned on account of his faith, but for 
the attitude he had assumed towards the Pope, and for not 
appearing when twice summoned by the synod. The arch- 
bishop's sympathy with his old master, Dioscorus, had evi- 
dently not been quite exorcised. He was followed in his 
defence of the questionable formula by the great majority of 
the bishops. 

It is evident that the commissioners perfectly understood 
the crisis that had now arisen. The bishops had signed the 
Tome of Leo, but some did not perfectly understand what 
they had signed ; some were still in sympathy with error, and 
others were still terrified by the ghost of Nestorius and 
Nestorian proclivities, which seemed to them to haunt all 
orthodox statements of the two natures in our Lord. 




—452 



THE QUESTION WHETHER 



421 



It fell to the lot of the imperial commissioners, placing 
themselves on the side of the legates (by whom they were 
guided) to bring the Eastern bishops to a better mind. They 
brought the matter to its true issue by asking practically 
whether they were prepared to withdraw themselves from the 
Supreme Pontiff? 

They said, ' Do you accept the letter of Leo ? ' — a question 
which, put as it was, shows that the commissioners did not 
consider the synod a superior authority. In fact the whole 
tone of the session shows that the bishops had to accept the 
Tome of Leo in the fulness of its meaning, or submit to be 
superseded by a council in the West. For this was what the 
legates had threatened. The bishops, however, exclaimed 
that they had both received and put their signatures to the 



Thereupon the commissioners pressed home the rigorous 
conclusion that what was in that letter must be inserted in 
their definition. ' No ! ' cried the bishops, ' it is not another 
definition that is being made; nothing is lacking to the 
definition. 9 And Eusebius of Dorylseum repeated their state- 
ment, ' It is not another definition that is being made.' He 
held that it was in perfect agreement with the Tome. ' The 
definition has confirmed the letter/ i.e. by its agreement with 
it, just as the bishops at Constantinople are said to have 
c confirmed ' the Nicene Creed, not as in a superior court, but 
by a loyal acceptance of it. 'Archbishop Leo,' they con- 
tinued, 'believes as we believe.' 'The definition contains 
everything.' ' The definition contains the faith.' ' Leo said 
the same as Cyril said ; Celestine the Pope confirmed what 
Cyril said; Xystus the Pope confirmed what Cyril said.' 
' There is one Baptism, one Lord, one Faith.' 

It is to be noticed how they bring in Celestine's and 
Xystus' confirmation of Cyril's writings, and assert that 
Celestine and Leo are at one. They would not dispute the 
orthodoxy of Leo ; but they feared, or pretended to fear, lest 
their submission to his letter should be taken to imply a 
denial of Cyril's orthodoxy, which had, they say, been gua- 
ranteed by two Popes. 

The commissioners now appealed to the emperor, who 



letter. 




422 



THEY WOULD FOLLOW LEO 



a.d. 400 



was near at hand, to know what should be done; and his 
Imperial Majesty sent word that a commission of bishops 
(which had already been proposed) must meet, or else a 
council in the West, as the legates had threatened, would be 
inevitable. 

The Dlyrian bishops, whose signature to the Tome after 
their instruction in Anatolius' house, had evidently been to 
a certain extent a matter of mechanical obedience, still pressed 
for the disputed definition, when at length the commissioners 
put before them straight and nakedly the choice which they 
must make, viz. Dioscorus or Leo. 4 Which will you follow, 
the most holy Leo or Dioscorus ? ' * We believe with Leo • 
was their immediate reply. ' Then you must admit into your 
definition the teaching of Leo, which has been stated,' was 
the commissioner's logical conclusion — alluding to the expres- 
sion * in two natures,' and not ' of two natures.* 

The commission met for discussion, but as there is no 
record of the nature of the discussion, we only know that 
they gave up their point and elected to follow Leo, and to 
insert in their definition the truth that our Divine Lord sub- 
sisted ' in two natures : 9 that is to say, that in His One Person 
there are two natures, the Human and Divine, unmingled 
after the union effected at Nazareth in the womb of the 
Mother of God. 

When they returned to the church the altered definition 
was read, and agreed upon without dissent. 

Thus the legates, by their firmness, had saved the position. 
And they had saved it as legates. Nothing short of the 
supreme position of Leo could have given to his legates the 
authority which they exercised so well at this session. After 
all that had been effected at this wonderful council, it would 
have ended in a catastrophe, but for the firm stand which 
they made on behalf of a single preposition, which had become 
the watchword of the orthodox party. No one else in that 
assembly could have opposed himself as an impassable barrier 
to the acceptance of an expression so minute, but so all- 
important. And the simple issue had at length been pre- 
sented to these Eutychian sympathisers from Ulyricum and 
Palestine, viz. would they follow Leo or not ? They had once 




-452 



HAD TO BE ANSWERED. 



423 



obeyed Dioscorus ; they were now induced to obey 1 the most 
holy Leo.' 

It was a momentous hour in the history of Christendom. 
And we, whose religion centres in our adoration of our 
Divine Lord, have to attribute its successful issue to the 
firmness of the legates of the successor of that Apostle ' who 
lives and exercises judgment in his successor ; ' and that 
firmness was due to the prayer of his Divine Master, through 
whom he 'confirmed the brethren.' But for the legates, 
the end would have been professed submission of the bishops 
to the teaching of Leo, and yet at the same time the adop- 
tion of a definition which let in the false teaching which Leo 
opposed. As it was they ' followed Leo ' in their definition, 
as they professed to have followed him in their subscription 
to his Tome. 

It was probably at this session that the synod drew up the 
allocution which was afterwards presented or read to the 
emperor. The synod suddenly glows with warm sympathy 
towards him whom it had so often called ' the Holy Father/ 
and it says, ' God has given the synod a champion against 
every error in the person of the Eoman bishop, who, like the 
ardent Peter, desires to lead everyone to God.' They then 
go on to deny that Leo's Tome was a different confession of 
faith from the Nicene. The object of such explanations is 
(they assert) to stop the mouths of ' innovators ' — doubtless 
in allusion to the late emperor's condemnation of St. Flavian 
as one who had ' innovated in religion.' They quote amongst 
other instances the synods of Sardica and Ephesus as having 
added useful explanations, saying that those who met at 
Sardica ' against the remains of Arius,' ' sent their judgment 
to those in the East ' — the West had done the same in the 
person of Leo — and they end with asking the emperor to be 
gracious in ' setting his seal to their godly decrees, and con- 
firming the preaching of the See of Peter. 9 

So far, then, there were two principles on which the action 
of the Church had been based. 

I. The contention throughout the Councils of Ephesus 
and Chalcedon was that it was not enough for anyone ac- 
cused of heresy to say that he was willing to recite the Nicene 




424 



COROLLARIES. 



a j>. 400 



Creed. The Nicene Creed needed explanation in view of 
fresh perversions ; that explanation was given by the Church, 
and these explanations must be received by those who would 
remain in the Church. The orthodox were those who ' heard 
the Church,' the present living Church. That which was 
decided under anathema by an oecumenical council (includ- 
ing, of course, its head), was just as necessary to be believed 
as the original scheme of doctrine. It was contained in that 
scheme, and to reject the voice of the living Church was 
tantamount to rejecting the original deposit of the faith. 
Men could not go behind the living voice and appeal to an- 
tiquity when that voice had decided that Mary was the 
Mother of God, or that there are two natures in our Divine 
Lord after the Incarnation. It belonged to the Church to 
expound her own deposit, and her children must receive as 
history that, and that alone, which she delivered to them 
as such. If a member of the Christian Church maintained 
that his researches into the early Fathers led him to decline 
the judgment of Celestine upon Nestorius, or Leo on Dios- 
corus, and to maintain the orthodoxy of the opinions cham- 
pioned by these heretics, he was subject to excommunication. 

II. Again, they more and more spoke of the See of Peter ; 
and as their needs multiplied, they had recourse more and 
more to its judgment as a court of appeal. Nothing, indeed, 
could exceed in fulness of statement the description of the 
relation of the Bishop of Borne to the Apostle Peter, given 
and accepted at the Council of Ephesus ; but at ChaJcedon 
the references were more frequent and from all quarters. 
Borne is the See of Peter to the Emperor Marcian, to the 
Empress Pulcheria, to the synod at Chalcedon ; she is wel- 
comed as such by Flavian, and described as such by St. Peter 
Chrysologus ; her own assertion is never once questioned even 
in the East, though made again and again, and made in such 
momentous acts of the Church's life as the excommunication 
of the Patriarch of Alexandria and the dogmatic exposition 
of the Catholic faith on points on which masses of Eastern 
bishops were going miserably astray. If Anglicanism con- 
sists mainly in a protest against the supremacy of the Pope, 
not a whisper of Anglicanism was heard during the fourth 




—462 



COROLLARIES. 



425 



General Council, unless it be from the coarse-minded, fero- 
cious heretic Dioscorus, who was deposed and excommuni- 
cated by St. Leo through (' per ') the instrumentality of the 
Holy Synod. The exposition of faith given by the Holy See — 
the Tome, that is, of Leo, or dogmatic epistle to Flavian — 
was signed by the greater number of bishops before it was 
brought before the synod ; it was not revised, nor reviewed, 
nor examined, but only publicly read, in the council itself. It 
was virtually enforced in the house of Anatolius upon the 
Ulyrian bishops who were tainted with Eutychianism, and 
upon the Palestinian bishops, who had been more or less 
influenced by Juvenal, soon to be their patriarch. They 
wished to see how Cyril and Leo agreed, rather than whether 
they did. For Cyril (as the bishops afterwards said) was con- 
firmed by Celestine, and therefore his teaching was the teach- 
ing of the Church. They came to see that Leo's teaching had 
not contradicted that of Celestine and (said the bishops) Leo 
resembled Peter in his championship of the faith. The Uly- 
rian bishops were instructed by the Bishop of Constantinople 
on the points on which their ignorance led them astray, and 
they subscribed it as what it was bound to be, in harmony 
with the writings of St. Cyril ; their judgment was a submis- 
sion and their submission was a judgment. And when all 
strife for the present was over they called it not only the voice 
of Peter, but ' the doctrine of the chair of Peter ' (t?)$ icadihpa* 
Hirpov Kfjpvyfia), and this in the presence of the emperor 
himself. 

For at the following session (the sixth) Marxian and 
Pulcheria, with their imperial suite, were present. The 
emperor told them why he had convened the synod. He 
does not say it was to decide open questions. On the contrary, 
it was convened in order ' that no one in future should 
venture to maintain concerning the birth of our Lord and 
Saviour anything else than that which the apostolic preach- 
ing and the decree, in accordance therewith, of the 818 holy 
Fathers had handed down to posterity, and which was also 
testified by the letter of the holy Pope Leo of Rome to Flavian.' 
And they asked him to give the force of civil law to the 
* teaching of the chair of Peter.' 




CHAPTER XXV. 



THEODOBBT AND MAXIMUS. 



After the sixth session the bishops continued their meet- 
ings, but no longer on the same footing. The council, in its 
strictly oecumenical character, was closed. The business trans- 
acted in the following meetings was of a comparatively local 
character, and consisted in the settlement of disputes between 
certain Eastern bishops. Thalassius of Caesar ea, although 
present at the later sessions, took back with him the record of 
the council's action up to this sixth session, and no further. 
Pelagius II. distinctly says in his letter to the Istrian bishops 
that the authoritative nature of the council ceased after the 
sixth action, and what followed was concerned with ' private 
matters.' And St. Leo describes the work submitted to the 
council as having consisted only of the definition of the faith 
and the restoration of the bishops who had lapsed at the 
Robber Synod. The rest of its proceedings, he says, were 
of a different nature ; and accordingly the official report of 
the synod included in its unquestionable programme only the 
two matters just mentioned; they placed the rest on a 
different footing. 1 The emperor had desired the bishops to 
remain a few days for the consideration of other matters, for 
the settlement of which it was natural to take advantage of 
such a gathering. Whilst, therefore, considerable importance 
attached to the arrangements which were made, they could 
not claim the same high level of authority as belonged to 
the series of sessions which culminated and closed with the 
address to their Imperial Majesties. 

I shall select three of their actions, the restoration of 

1 They excuse themselves for entering on the subject of Constantinople's 
position. 




a.d. 400—462 



THEODORETS APPEAL 



427 



Theodoret, the acceptance of Maximus, and the twenty-eighth 
canon, as bearing specially on the subject of this book. 

I. A great deal has been made of the case of Theodoret, 
as a supposed proof of the repudiation of Papal supremacy. 
It will be, therefore, well to state it somewhat fully. 1 

He had been condemned by Dioscorus at the Bobber Synod 
for his sympathy with Nestorius. Thereupon he appealed to 
Borne. He wrote to Leo and said that ( if Paul, the herald of 
the truth, the trumpet of the Spirit, ran to the great Peter 
. . . much more do we, in our littleness, run to your Apostolic 
throne that from you we may receive healing for the wounds 
of the Church: for it is fitting that you should have the 
primacy in all things.' He then enumerates the advantages 
with which the Apostolic throne is adorned, viz. ' abundance 
of spiritual gifts as compared with others; superabundant 
splendour ; the presidency over the whole world ; 2 abundance 
of subjects, 3 present rule, and the communication of her name 
to her subjects ; supereminent faith, as in the days of the 
Apostles ; the tombs of the common Fathers and teachers of 
the truth, Peter and Paul, • . . who arose in the East but 
died in the West, and from that West now illuminate the 
whole world — these have made your thjone most illustrious.' 
Then, after setting forth his condemnation at the Latrocinium 
(Bobber Synod) in his absence by Dioscorus, he adds, ' But I 
await the sentence of your apostolic throne.' He desires to 
know whether he is to acquiesce in this unjust deposition or 
not. ' For I await ' (he repeats) ' your sentence, and if you 
should command me to acquiesce in the adverse decision, I 
acquiesce.' 4 

Again he says to Leo : ' I beseech and entreat your Holi- 
ness that your upright and just tribunal would assist me, 

1 Canon Bright writes (Ch. Hist. p. 417, third edition) about St. Leo : 1 His 
judgments, whether as to an individual or as to a doctrine, were first reviewed 
and then confirmed/ as a proof of the supposed difference between his position 
and that of the Holy See amongst ourselves now. The ' individual ' is Theo- 
doret. We have seen that his doctrine was not ' reviewed and confirmed ' as 
by a superior court. 

3 rrjs olKovfiipTjs wpoKa0r)fi4rri. Gf. St. Ignatius' vpotcddrrrai rrjs &*ydhnj*, presi- 
dent of the [covenant of] love— said of Rome. 

■ ohnrrSfwr, lit. inhabitants. * 4fifi4rm (Theod. Ep. cxiii.). 




428 



TO ROME. 



a.d. 400 



who am appealing to it, and would bid me come to you and 
show that my teaching treads in the footsteps of the 
Apostles.' 1 To Renatus, a priest of the Church of Rome, 
employed as legate to Ephesus, 2 he writes : ' Concerning 
this case, I beseech your Holiness that you would persuade 
the most holy and blessed archbishop to use his apostolic 
authority and bid me fly to your council ' 3 — that is, the 
council which the Pope invariably used in the determination 
of greater causes. Theodoret adds words which are omitted 
by Quesnel, who, in defiance of the context, endeavoured to 
show that it was not to the authority of the Pope himself that 
Theodoret appealed — words which even if the preceding quo- 
tations were to be forgotten would be sufficient* to show that 
it was the exercise of the authority of the Holy See that he 
was invoking, viz. : ' For that most holy See has the sove- 
reignty over the Churches which are in the whole world on 
many counts ; and before all these, in that it has remained 
free from the stain of heresy, and none has ever sat in it 
with thoughts contrary [to the faith] ; it has kept the Apo- 
stolic grace whole and uncorrupt.' He then expresses his 
readiness to acquiesce in its judgment, whatever it may be. 

It is clear from this that it was not the judgment of the 
synod at Rome in itself that he sought, but the judgment of 
the Sovereign Pontiff, expressed, as it was wont to be, in 
synod. The synod was the apparatus, the machinery, the 
setting of the Papal judgment. The bishops of this synod 
could not be considered infallible as compared with other 
synods, except by reason of their relationship to the Holy See. 
It was the infallibility of this latter on which he distinctly 
placed reliance. 

At the same time he wrote to Constantinople to Arch- 
bishop Anatolius, to induce him to persuade the emperor to 
allow him (since a bishop could not move without imperial 
leave and the assistance of the imperial purse) 4 ' to go to the 

1 Ep. xoii. o. 5. 

9 He was probably dead when Theodoret wrote to him. But Theodoret was 
insufficiently informed, according to Tillemont. 
a Ep. cxvi. 

4 Through orders to the civil officials— as we should say, by free passes. 




—462 



ROME ABSOLVED HIM, 



429 



West and be judged by those bishops most beloved of God.' 
Theodoret was not simpleton enough to ask the emperor's 
leave for anything that contravened the laws of the Church as 
understood in the East ; and yet he did ask the Bishop of 
Constantinople to get him leave to have his case tried at 
Rome. From which we may justly conclude that the trans- 
ference of the case of a Greek bishop to Eome was not con- 
sidered by either the Bishop of Constantinople or the emperor 
to be in contravention of the laws of the Church. It was not 
here the case of anything claimed by the Pope, but a glimpse 
of how Greek bishopfi understood the matter amongst them- 
selves. These Western bishops, ' most beloved of God,' could 
possess no rights over an Eastern bishop, except as being the 
council of the sovereign ruler of the Church, as Theodoret 
had called the Boman Pontiff. But as the custom was ever 
to exercise the Pontifical authority by means of a council, it 
was all one to appeal to the Episcopal Council at Rome or to 
the Bishop of Rome himself. Theodoret's expressions con- 
cerning the latter necessitate this conclusion so far as his own 
judgment was concerned, and his letter to Anatolius gives his 
estimate of what the Bishop of Constantinople deemed a 
proper course for justice to take. It would, indeed, be diffi- 
cult to express in clearer terms the teaching of the Vatican 
Council concerning the relationship of the Holy See to the 
rest of the Church than has been done by Theodoret. Accord- 
ing to him that See is the Holy See, the Apostolic throne, the 
sovereign ruler of the Church throughout the world, and the 
one pure, true channel of the Church's faith. 

It seems that the writings which Theodoret promised to 
send to Borne for inspection and judgment did not reach Leo 
until after the legates had left for Chalcedon; but on re- 
ceiving them St. Leo at once passed sentence in Theodoret's 
favour. He was worthy to be restored to his see. Both 
St. Leo 1 and the commissioners 2 speak of the Papal 'judg- 
ment.' So that there can be no doubt that St. Leo passed 
actual sentence on Theodoret's individual case, and it follows 
that it was a regular appeal on the part of Theodoret. We 
may assume, indeed, that there was a careful examination of 



1 Ep. cxx. 5. 



8 Aotio viii. 




430 



LEAVING THE EXECUTION 



a.d. 400 



the case at Borne, considering the caution invariably exercised 
by this great Pontiff in admitting anyone to communion, who 
had been suspected of heresy. And Theodoret had been in 
active sympathy with Nestorius, but had detached himself 
from that heretic when the reconciliation took place between 
St. Cyril and John of Antioch. It is, therefore, in the highest 
degree improbable that St. Leo would pass judgment without 
careful and, presumably, conciliar examination of his present 
teaching. He had probably signed the dogmatic epistle to 
Flavian, or offered to sign it. 

When, therefore, Theodoret came to Chalcedon, he was in 
the position of a man whose rights were secured by the Papal 
judgment, and who was entitled to act as bishop. The council, 
however, was called for the special purpose, amongst other 
things, of restoring the bishops who had been deposed in the 
Latrocinium (Robber Synod) ; 1 and St. Leo had commissioned 
it to act in the matter of such restoration. 9 Consequently it 
would seem that St. Leo wrote at once to the legates to say 
that he received Theodoret to communion and restored him 
to his see, so far as the right was concerned, although the 
complete execution of his sentence involving the actual resti- 
tution to this see would naturally remain in the hands of the 
synod, having been already devolved upon them by Leo him- 



When, therefore, the council opened its proceedings and 
Eusebius of Dorylseum had preferred the accusation against 
Diodorus, Theodoret was told by the imperial commissioners 
to enter ; but the Eutychian sympathisers amongst the 
bishops were indignant at his restoration. They were certain 
that Leo had been overreached ; and considering Theodoret's 
antecedents (his opposition to Cyril) it is not surprising that 
they should think this. For it was a matter in which, on the 
principles of the Vatican decrees, Leo might have been de- 
ceived. And the Eutychians, long years after this, maintained 
that Theodoret was insincere, and that St. Leo had been over- 
reached. They ought, however, on any but the Papal theory 
of government, to have said that it made no difference 
whether he was deceived or not; for what right had the 



self. 



1 Ep. Ixxvii 1 



1 Ep. xciii. o. 8. 




—452 



OF ITS SENTENCE TO THE SYNOD. 



431 



Bishop of Borne to restore a Greek bishop to his see at all ? 
But this was not their contention ; they neither blamed 
Theodoret for appealing to Borne, nor Borne for hearing his 
case. They simply objected that Theodoret had not placed 
bis case honestly before the Bishop of Borne. 1 And in like 
manner, at Chalcedon, they demurred to the synodical ac- 
ceptance of Theodoret as bishop, and clamoured for his 
extrusion. 

The imperial commissioners, however, and the synod, 
decided that Theodoret's restoration by St. Leo must stand 
good so far as this, that he was to act as bishop, whilst any 
charge they had to prefer against him should be investigated 
later on. He was, I say, to act as bishop, for he was allowed 
to take his place as accuser, and was accepted as such by the 
whole council on the ground that he had been restored, or 
rather his deposition declared null and void, by the judgment 
of Leo. According to the arrangement of the Council of 
Constantinople (882), a degraded bishop could not act as 
accuser of another bishop ; so that in admitting Theodoret 
as accuser of Dioscorus, the synod accepted the sentence of 
the Pope. 

And, in point of fact, he subsequently acted as fully bishop 
in the course of the council. When the Illyrian bishops 
doubted about the meaning of some words in Leo's letter, 
Theodoret set them right, quoting from St. Cyril, on which 
the commissioners said : ' After this, who doubts ? * and the 
bishops exclaimed, ' No one doubts ! ' 2 

In the fourth act Theodoret gave his judgment on the 
Tome of Leo ; and in the sixth act he signed, saying, * I, 
Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, defining have subscribed.' 3 

And now, in the seventh session (the eighth act), the 
bishops proceeded to satisfy the demands of the Illyrian and 
other bishops that Theodoret should anathematise Nestorius. 
They had consented to sit with him in synod on the ground 
that Leo had pronounced his deposition null and void ; but 
they now — at least a certain portion of them — in deference to 
the clamours of the Egyptian bishops, desired that he should 

1 B.g. in the conference held before Justinian in 533. 

» Mansi, t. vii. p. 19. 1 Ibid, t vii. p. 146. 




432 



ROME'S SENTENCE RESPECTED. a.d. 400 



assure the council that, whatever might have been his dispo- 
sitions or avowals when Leo pronounced sentence in his 
favour, he was prepared to do what every bishop might be 
called upon to do, i.e. anathematise Nestorius. In this they 
were perfectly within their rights. The Egyptian bishops had 
been put off during the synod with the promise that they 
should have satisfaction later on. Theodoret, after a little 
fencing, anathematised Nestorius By name, and immediately 
the bishops burst into an exclamation of tremendous force, 
saying, 1 Leo has judged after ' (i.e. in accordance with the mind 
of) * God ! 1 It was Leo's judgment, as I have said above. 

That the action of the bishops was in no way (on the 
principles of the Vatican decrees) an infringement of the 
authority of the Holy See, which Theodoret had invoked and 
described as presiding over the whole world, is certain from 
the following facts, 1 viz. that the legates took part in the 
matter and actually gave the decision — that the leader of the 
Tllyrians was the Bishop of Thessaly, who entirely depended 
on Borne, being the Papal vicar in that region — and that Leo 
himself saw in the bishop's action no derogation of his 
authority, 2 and that in spite of the commissioners' attempt to 
soothe the Egyptians by saying Theodoret should not act as 
judge, he did, as a matter of fact, act as such though not in 
the case of Dioscorus which was the point of their objection. 

So that the matter may be fairly summarised thus, St. 
Leo had given the bishops the fullest authority to deal with 
the cases of the bishops who had been 'deposed ' at the Bobber 
Synod. He had declared Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, to be 
deserving of his bishopric, having certified to his orthodoxy. 
Accordingly, in spite of the clamours of the Egyptian bishops, 
who had had to see their patriarch Dioscorus disgraced, and, 
en revanche, desired to make out that Theodoret had deceived 
St. Leo, he was allowed to act as judge in the matter of faith, 
though not in the deposition of their patriarch. When all 
was over, he was required to do what would satisfy the irri- 
tated Egyptian bishops, viz. anathematise Nestorius, and 
then, after saying, as it were, to these bishops, ' You see that 
Leo, as usual, was right,* they placed him in possession of his 

1 Cf. Natalia Alexander, Diss, de Theodoreto. • * Ep. zoiii. ad Theod. 




—452 



MAXIMUS OF ANTIOCH 



433 



bishopric, their decision being expressed by the Papal legates. 
There was nothing in all this that placed the council above 
the Pope ; on the contrary, the admission of Theodoret to the 
council as judge in doctrine, though not in the case of Dios- 
corus, of whom nevertheless he was allowed to be an accuser, 
which was forbidden to a degraded bishop, was a signal 
instance of the deference which was felt to be due to the 
sentence of the Bishop of Eome on the case of an Eastern 
bishop, who had expressly appealed to that judgment. 

Another matter settled by the council concerned the See 
of Antioch, which had been occupied at the Robber Synod by 
a bishop named Domnus. 

There was something pathetic about this man's career. 
He was nephew to the celebrated John of Antioch, and ex- 
perienced a call to the solitary life. Fired, however, with the 
idea of recalling his uncle from his sympathies with Nestorius, 
he left his cell, contrary to the advice of the Abbot Euthymius, 
who predicted the misfortune that actually befel him. At 
Antioch he won his way to the episcopal throne, succeeding his 
uncle as successor of Peter in that third see of Christendom. 
But his weakness led him to show the white feather at the 
Bobber Synod, and, cowed by Dioscorus, he consented to the 
restoration of Eutyches, and the condemnation of Flavian. 
But he reaped a rich reward of his cowardice in being deposed 
by Dioscorus, to whom he had truckled, on the ground of 
supposed sympathy in the past with Nestorius, and of having 
condemned Cyril. The indulgence shown to the other leaders 
of the Bobber Synod on their repentance was not extended to 
Domnus by St. Leo, who forbade his restoration to the See of 
Antioch. He ended his days in penitent retirement. 

Anatolius, in contravention of the Nicene Canons, ordained 
Maximus Bishop of Antioch in place of Domnus. And on the 
restoration at Chalcedon of the bishops who had lapsed at the 
Latrocinium, whilst other bishops were restored to their sees, 
Maximus was allowed to retain his intruded position on the 
sole ground that St. Leo had ordered that his ordination 
should hold good. 1 

A writer 2 who professes the greatest regard for the prero- 



1 Mansi, t. vii. p. 258. 



8 Quesnel. 



F F 




434 



IRREGULARLY ORDAINED, 



a.b. 400 



gatives of the Sovereign Pontiff, but takes every opportunity 
of undermining their historical basis, remarks on this treat- 
ment of Domnus and Maximus, that if only the Act in which 
their case occurs were genuine, we should have in our hands an 
unequivocal testimony to ' the supreme authority of the Pontiff 
both over synods and over the Oriental bishops — the bishops of 
the greater sees.' His arguments against the genuineness of 
the record of this session were dealt with in a very satisfactory 
manner by Baluze, and in a still more trenchant way by 
Tillemont, who, in spite of his Gallican sympathies, pro- 
nounces Quesnel's array of arguments nothing less than 
imbecile. It was reserved, however, for the brothers Ballerini 
to set the matter at rest by means of a manuscript which 
Quesnel had not seen, and which is older even than Rusticus. 
Their refutation of QuesnePs objections is complete. 1 

The prerogative admitted, in this Act, as belonging to Leo, 
covers everything ever claimed by the Holy See in the way of 
jurisdiction. St. Leo dispensed with the irregularity of 
Maximus' ordination in contravention of the Nicene canons, 
doubtless because he had shown his fidelity to the true faith, 
whilst Domnus, after his cowardly conduct at the Latroci- 
nium, did not ask for reinstatement, but eventually 2 elected to 
retire to his original seclusion. 

Now the authoritative settlement on the part of the Bishop 
of Kome of the succession to that Oriental see, one of the 
three 1 first ' or ' greater ' sees, was, if anything ever was, an 
exercise of Papal supremacy ; and the acceptance of the settle- 
ment by these bishops assigning no other ground except that 
the settlement had been made by the Pope, amounts to a 
demonstration that, in the minds of the Eastern bishops of 
that time, the government of the Church was strictly and 
properly Papal. 

But further, the acceptance of the Papal decision concern- 
ing the Antiochene succession occurred in the midst of a 

1 See an excellent summary of Baluze's proofs of the genuineness of the 
Act in Migne's Leo the Great, vol. ii. pp. 1269-75. The Ballerini afterwards 
clenched the matter by the Latin copy of an older Greek MS. alluded to in the 
text. 

* For the sequence of events, see Migne's Leonts Opp. ed. Bailer, t. ii. 
p. 726. 




—452 



BUT CONDONED BY LEO, 



435 



session which was dealing with the case of Ibas, Bishop of 
Edessa. 1 It was proposed that the minutes of the Bobber 
Synod should be read. To this the Papal legates objected on 
the ground that the acts of that synod had been rendered 
null and void by 'the Apostolic Bishop of the city of Borne/ 
The Bishop of Constantinople (Anatolius) at once rose and 
said that he agreed that all that was done at that ill-fated 
synod was invalid, excepting only what was done in the 
matter of Maximus, Bishop of Antioch ; and he gave as his 
reason for saying so, that the most holy Archbishop of Borne 
had received Maximus into communion, and had 'decided 
that he should preside over the Church of the Antiocheans.' a 
To this the rest of the bishops agreed. 

So that the invalidity of the Bobber Synod was assigned 
by these Eastern bishops simply and solely to the decision of 
the Bishop of Borne ; and the single exception made to the 
general invaliditv of its proceedings was one that the Pope 
had ordered, and its validity was attributed by these bishops 
to the Papal decision. 

But whilst the Pope gave his sanction to Maximus' ordina- 
tion to the See of Antioch, he refused it to the following com- 
pact now entered into by that bishop in regard to some 
provinces of his patriarchate. 

Juvenal of Jerusalem had long set his heart upon the ex- 
tension of his jurisdiction. He had succeeded in so completely 
gaining the ear of the emperor, Theodosius II., that he had 
been allowed to count in his rule the provinces of Phoenicia, 
and also of Arabia, and the three provinces of Palestine, 
which properly belonged to Antioch. St. Cyril had done his 
utmost to oppose this iniquitous proceeding, and appealed to 
the Pope, entreating him with earnest prayer (' sollicita prece ') 3 
to give no ground for such ' illicit attempts.' But Juvenal 
gained his case with the secular power by means of forged 
documents. 

The quarrel over this lust of jurisdiction had gone on until 

1 The history of Ihas does not come within the scope of this book, but 
belongs rather to that of the fifth council. 

2 &PX* IV r V* 'Amoxt** iiac\ri<rla$ toutaUfftv (Mansi, t. vii. p. 258). 
• Leonis Ep. cxix. ad Maximum, 



f p 2 




436 



AND WARNED BY HIM. 



a.d. 400—462 



the time of the council, when Maximus acquiesced in a com- 
promise, by which Antioch was to be shorn of the three pro- 
vinces of Palestine, and Juvenal was to give up all claim to 
the Phoenicians and Arabians. But Maximus consented to 
this arrangement only ' if it was approved by our venerable 
Father, the Archbishop of Greater Borne.' 1 Leo, however, 
withheld his sanction, and desired the Bishop of Antioch to 
keep him well informed as to what went on, reminding him 
that there must be some better reason for his allowing Antioch 
and Jerusalem to break the Nicene settlement than had been 
adduced. 8 He also informed him that the assent of his 
legates was necessarily provisional on matters on which they 
had no definite directions from himself. But the Pope did 
not, at least in that letter, absolutely and finally decide the 
matter. He only withdrew his sanction, and urged upon 
Maximus that he should * share with the Apostolic See in this 
anxious matter,' and recognise the privileges of the ' third see ' 
of Christendom. 3 

1 Of. MS. of Actio, edited by the Ballerini. The expression • Greater Borne ' 
is due to the account being from a Greek source. 
* Ep. cxix. ad Maximum, 

■ The writer in the Diet, of Chr. Biogr. (vol. iii. p. 881) has completely mis- 
understood this phrase. He speaks of Leo exhorting Maximus, 1 as a sharer in 
an Apostolical See/ to maintain the doctrine, Ac. St. Leo says : 1 Dignum est 
enim te Apostolic© sedis in hac sollicitudine esse consortem et . . . privOegia 
terti© sedis agnoscere.' 




CHAPTEE XXVI. 



THE BYZANTINE PLOT. 



It had been well for the Church if the council had now dis- 
persed. But it was not to be. The bishops who remained 
now engaged in a project which had long agitated the minds 
of a few leading spirits. 

For more than eighty years Constantinople had nursed a 
thought which was destined to change the course of eccle- 
siastical history, and plunge her into a permanent schism. 
Photius, who consummated the schism between the East and 
West in the ninth century, claimed for the Bishop of Constanti- 
nople the title and position of ' Universal Bishop. 1 The Bishop 
of Eome had been such, according to his theory, until the 
capital of the empire passed from Borne to Byzantium. But 
the position of universal bishop was based, according to Pho- 
tius, on the secular grandeur of the city ; so that when Con- 
stantino left Borne it was only a matter of time for Byzantium 
to succeed to the honours of the original capital. 

The difference between this theory and that which ob- 
tained in the fifth century involved the whole question of the 
property attributed to the Church in the Nicene Creed under 
the title ' Apostolic.' Under that title, in the mind of the early 
Church, was included the government of the Church by the 
Apostles and their successors ; understanding by ' the Apostles,' 
as the primitive Church did, a body of men who were asso- 
ciated together by our Lord under a visible head. ' It has 
been known to all ages,' so it was said at Ephesus, ' and it 
is doubtful to none, that the blessed Apostle Peter, the Prince 
and head of the Apostles, the rock and foundation of the 
Catholic Church, received from our Saviour the keys of the 
Kingdom.' And the see of that Apostle, consecrated by the 




438 



THE AMBITION 



jl.d. 400 



blood of the two Apostles, himself and St. Paul, became, in 
the words of St. Irenceus and St. Cyprian, the principal or 
ruling Church, that which, according to St. Ignatius of 
Antioch, writing in the second century, 'presided over the 
[covenant of] love,' and in which, according to St. Augustine, 
' the principalship had ever been in force/ and was designated 
in the terminology of the whole Church, East and West, in 
the fifth century, ' the Apostolic See.' 

The chasm between the teaching of the schismatic Bishop 
of Constantinople, Photius, in the ninth century, and his 
predecessor in the see in the fifth century at Chalcedon, is 
exactly expressed in the words of the latter when he said to 
Leo * The see of Constantinople has for its parent your own 
Apostolic See, having specially joined itself thereunto.' 1 

But although Anatolius thus expressed the true relation 
between Borne and Constantinople, his action at Chalcedon 
prepared the way for the unhappy schism into which the 
East eventually plunged, under the guidance of the miserable 
Photius, with his claim to be * universal bishop.' The term 
' universal bishop ' is one which might be properly used to 
express the relation of the Apostolic See to the rest of the 
Church, but even so it needed a certain care lest it should be 
thought to mean that other bishops were but legates or vice- 
bishops of the one universal bishop. In fear of this meaning 
being attached to the term, St. Gregory repudiated it. It was, 
however, freely used at the Council of Chalcedon. And there 
is no fear of any Catholic nowadays giving it such an un- 
orthodox interpretation as St. Gregory detected in John's 
use of the term, and so there is no ground for refusing it to 
the occupant of the See of Borne. But on the lips of a bishop 
of Constantinople it necessarily implied a heresy, for it also 
implied the idea that the government of the Church was not 
apostolic but Erastian. The earthly emperor, according to 
this theory, by moving his capital, moved the centre of the 
Church's unity. So Photius argued. Neither he nor his pre- 
decessors were really prepared to carry out their theory to 
its logical issue, for, as a Sovereign Pontiff asked of his pre- 
decessors, were they prepared to call Bavenna, or Gangra, or 

1 * Anatolius ad Leonem ' (Ep. oi.). 



Digitized by 



—452 



OF CONSTANTINOPLE 



439 



Sirmium, the centre of the Church's government when the 
emperor made these, as he did, the centre of his rule ? 

The attack on the original constitution of the Church, 
which culminated, under favourable political circumstances, 
in the schismatic action of the East under Photius, was com- 
menced in fact at the Council of Constantinople. There the 
bishops assembled under Nectarius had decreed a certain 
precedency of honour to the ' New Rome,' as Byzantine pride 
delighted to call the city of Constantino. 

But they had not so much as ventured to send their canon 
to the West. It was a purely local arrangement, not sanctioned 
even by the rest of the East. 1 But it was continually being 
acted upon, and the titular precedency presently grew into a 
very real jurisdiction. Constantinople, being the centre of 
political and commercial interests, continually saw bishops 
from various parts staying in her midst, and convenience led 
to the custom of settling many an ecclesiastical dispute in 
meetings 2 composed of the Bishop of Constantinople and those 
bishops who happened to be in the imperial city. It came 
also to be sometimes a matter of convenience and sometimes 
a matter of sec alar advantage for bishops to be consecrated at 
Constantinople. And what began as an occasional practice 
attained in course of time to the rank of a regular custom, 
attended, as such customs usually are, with pecuniary ad- 
vantages to the see that thus became an increasing centre. 3 

The lust of power, so infectious in an imperial centre, and 
sometimes a certain immediate disciplinary gain to the Church, 
had thus led to claims in the way of jurisdiction which found 
no countenance even in the third canon of the Council of 
Constantinople. Large provinces of the Church in the East 
had come under the practical jurisdiction of the Bishop of 
Constantinople, though not without struggles and alternations 
of submission and resistance. 

Had Constantinople remained satisfied even with this, her 

1 Mr. Gore says (Diet, of Chr. Biog., art. * Leo, 1 p. 663) that ' Leo's state- 
ment that this canon had never taken effect is entirely untrue.' What St. Leo 
said was that the canon was null and void so far as the sanction of the West 
was concerned, and this was strictly true. 

* Galled the cfootio* tv*r\nov<ra. 9 Cf. Cone. Chalced. Act zvi. 




440 



LED HER TO SEIZE 



a.d. 400 



relations to the autonomous eparchies of Asia Minor and 
Pontus and Thrace might have been capable of adjustment. 
But she was continually being brought into contact with the 
1 greater sees,' as they were called, of Alexandria and Antioch. 
And their position of recognised superiority stood in the way 
of that programme of universal domination in the East which 
was now looming before her mind. She had made an enormous 
stride in the third canon of the Council of Constantinople. 
By the arrangement there proposed she took honorary pre- 
cedence of Alexandria and Antioch. But this canon, having 
received no ecclesiastical sanction, had done no more than 
keep before the minds of the Eastern bishops her ideal of 
Church government. 

It must not, however, be supposed that that ideal as at 
present conceived included any real equality of jurisdiction 
with Borne herself. Constantinople wished to be in the East 
what Borne was as patriarch of the West. Tlarputpx^ 
Kkrjpovade was St. Gregory of Nazianzus' condemnation of 
the East. The relation of Borne to the whole Church as the 
See of St. Peter — as in a peculiar and inalienable sense, the 
Apostolic See — was too firmly rooted in the mind of the 
Christian world for any idea of subverting that to enter as 
yet into even Byzantine schemes of exaltation ; that was an 
after-thought. To be the Patriarch of the East over Alex- 
andria and over Antioch was the summit of Constantinople's 
present ambition. And, as we shall see, Constantinople did 
not dream of the possibility of really securing this object of 
her ambition, except with the permission of Rome, as represent- 
ing the blessed Apostle Peter} 

Now, Constantinople had met with more than one serious 
rebuff at the Council of Chalcedon. In discussing the com- 
plaint of Photius of Tyre a matter had come before the Fathers 
which touched the influence of Constantinople in her most 
sensitive part. The question had arisen whether the meetings 
of the Bishop of Constantinople and the other bishops resi- 
dent or sojourning in the city could be called a synod, and 
the bishops at Chalcedon had refused to say that they could. 



Letter of the bishops to Leo. 




—452 



THE FAVOURABLE OPPORTUNITY 



441 



This was throwing a serious slight on Constantinople's method 
of action at its very core. 

Again, the bishops of Asia had desired that the bishops of 
Ephesus should not be ordained at Constantinople, and the 
council had refused to support Constantinople in this her 
growing custom. 

Once more, the bishops had refused to give a definite sanc- 
tion to Constantinople's custom of ordaining a bishop for 
Basilinopolis. 

The time had therefore come for Constantinople to make 
one desperate effort to gain a quasi-synodical sanction for the 
position which she claimed as second only to Rome. Every- 
thing favoured her ambitious project. The bishops had left 
Chalcedon by the hundred, and amongst those that were left 
there was not one that might not be counted on for either 
assent or silence. 

Of the two ' greater sees ' Alexandria was vacant, and 
Antioch was occupied by a partisan of Anatolius, who owed to 
him his irregular elevation, which had been pardoned by 
Home only (as Leo said) ' for the sake of peace.' 1 

Constantinople, therefore, had nothing to fear from these. 
She only needed a lack of scrupulous fairness on her own 
part to enable her to press the matter to a successful issue 
under these favourable circumstances. But further, she could 
count upon at least the silence of another leading prelate, viz. 
Juvenal of Jerusalem, who had himself just gained the object 
of his ambition for the last twenty years in the compromise 
by which he had wrested three provinces from Antioch. He 
at any rate was not in a position to complain of any illicit 
stretch of jurisdiction on the part of another. And Juvenal 
and Anatolius had a further bond in that both had come 
under the influence of Dioscorus and coquetted with Euty- 
chianism. Then the Bishop of Heraclea, the Primate of 
Thrace, was absent, and he was very closely concerned in the 
project that Constantinople had before her of extending her 
actual jurisdiction as well as securing the semblance of syn- 
odical sanction for titular precedence. This primate was 
represented by Lucian, who was so friendly to Anatolius that 



1 4 Studio pads.' 




442 



FOR SHELTERING HER PROJECTS 



a.d. 400 



he was sent by him to Rome on this very matter. Ephesus, 
again, of supreme importance, as one of the exarchies to be 
robbed of its autonomy, was vacant, Bassian and Stephen 
having been deposed. Thalassius of Cfflsarea was there, but 
did not subscribe. The Hlyrians were not there, not even 
Thessalonia, neither was Ancyra, Corinth, Nicomedia, Cos, 
or Iconium, all of them important centres. In fact, the little 
knot of bishops whom Constantinople gathered round herself 
by various means could not by any stretch of language be 
called a representative ecclesiastical body. Moreover they 
had no leave from Borne to discuss the question now forced 
upon the bishops by Constantinople ; it was no part of the 
council's programme. It was simply a plot against the 
Church's order, with hardly a name that would command the 
confidence of the Church except Eusebius of Dorylceum. The 
imperial commissioners were asked to assist at the session, 
but they refused. The legates also withdrew. There was 
not a single Western bishop present. But these ' astute * 
Orientals, as the African bishop Facundus called them, drew 
up a canon which flung the Nicene settlement as to prece- 
dence to the winds, and assigned, on the one hand, the first 
place in the East to Constantinople, and on the other hand 
gave her jurisdiction over Asia Minor, Thrace, and Pontus* 
Their metropolitans were to be deprived of their position 
as left to them by the Nicene Fathers, and Constantinople was 
to be not only New Borne in the civil order, but in the eccle- 
siastical hierarchy she was to stand second to Borne in point 
of titular precedence, and at the same time to receive an 
enormous extension of her jurisdiction in the East. She had 
hoped and tried to gain the confirmation and ordination of 
the provincial bishops as well as of the metropolitans, but 
owing to the opposition of some metropolitans she failed in 
this part of her project. 

On the following day the Papal legates demanded an 
explanation of what had been done in their absence. They 
had absented themselves on the technical ground that after 
the definition of faith had been drawn up, and the matter of 
the lapsed bishops dealt with, their commission ended. But 
it turned out that they had also received orders from Borne 




—45:2 



UNDER A CANON 



443 



to oppose any attempt at altering the relations of bishops on 
the ground of the civil status of their sees. Leo was already 
well aware of the ambitious projects of Constantinople. 

Aetius, the archdeacon, now did his best to purge the 
action of the bishops of its irregularity. He said that it must 
be owned that the matters of faith had been decided in a 
fitting way, but pleaded that it was customary to take in 
hand other necessary matters; that they had asked the 
legates to be present, but without success, and that they had 
received the permission of the imperial commissioners to 
proceed with the business. The legates, however, maintained, 
and were probably justified in maintaining, that the bishops 
had signed in fear ; that the proposed canon contravened 
the Nicene settlement ; that it was professedly grounded on 
canons which had not been enrolled amongst those of the 
Church ; 1 and, lastly, that if they had been benefiting by the 
said canon up till now, what need of anything further ? — and 
if they had not, why do they now apply for sanction for that 
which is an infringement of the canons ? — reasoning which was 
unanswerable. 

In consequence of this mention of the canons, the com- 
missioners requested that each side should read the canons 
on which they relied. The legates accordingly read the sixth 
canon of Nicsea, in which Alexandria and Antioch, and not 
Constantinople, come after Eome. Aetius is then supposed 
to have read first a slightly different version of the same 
canon, and then the third of Constantinople. But this is in 
the highest degree improbable, since his supposed reading of 
that version makes nothing for the point at issue. The rise 
of Constantinople took place after the Council of Nicsea ; no 
one pretends, or pretended, that the Nicene canons in any 
way assisted Constantinople in its present aims. It was then 
an inferior see, and left so by the Nicene Fathers. It was on 
the third canon of Constantinople that these bishops took 
their stand, as their resolution in the previous session shows. 
The Nicene canon was their difficulty. Indeed, in one of the 
oldest versions of the Acts of Chalcedon that we possess, this 



1 1 Non conscripti .' 




444 



WHICH CONTRAVENED 



A.D. 400 



recitation of the sixth canon by Aetius does not appear. 1 
There are also other indications that the text has been 
tampered with here ; for between the supposed recitation of 
the sixth canon and that of the third of Constantinople occurs 
the statement that ' the same secretary read from the same 
codex the synodicon of the second synod/ which Mansi rightly 
transfers to the margin, as an impossible statement to have 
occurred in the original. The Council of Constantinople was 
not called ' the second synod ' until after the Council of 
Chalcedon had placed it in that rank. The expression, there- 
fore, belongs to a later period than the original of the Council 
of Chalcedon. Accordingly, Eusticus, who had before him 
very early manuscripts, omits this expression, although the 
sixth canon appears in his manuscript. The insertion, there- 
fore, had been made before his time, doubtless, as has been 
suggested above, by a Greek scribe, who, seeing a Greek 
version of the sixth canon in the margin, put it into the text, 
and some after copyist inserted the remark about the second 
synod. Dr. Bright refers to the expression * oecumenical,* 
used by the council of 882 of the council of 881 ; 2 but this 
could at that date only mean that it was a council of all the 
East, and it is certain that it had not yet been reckoned by 
the Church in general as the second synod. It would have 
been a simple impertinence to call it the second synod before 
it had received such a designation from the whole Church. 
Hefele seems to have misunderstood the Ballerini's argument, 
in urging that it was at Chalcedon that the Council of Con- 
stantinople took its place as second in the general councils. 
This is, of course, true; but the original of this Act could 
hardly have started the phrase. 3 

What, however, is of greater importance is the conclusion 
which the imperial commissioners now drew from the whole 
discussion. The legates had quoted the sixth Nicene canon, 

1 The Codex JuUanus, now called Parisiensis, Baluze first noticed this, 
and has been followed by the Ballerini. 

3 Notes on the Canons, <£c, 1892, p. 228. The reader mast not suppose that 
the reference to Theodoret which Dr. Bright gives contains any expression of 
that writer in favour of his opinion ; it only contains the letter of the council 



of 382. 



* Ballerini, De Antiq. Collect. Canonum, Part I. cap. vi. 8. 




—452 



THE NICEXE SETTLEMENT. 



445 



beginning ' Rome has always held the primacy,' and had read 
onwards about Alexandria and Antioch. The Archdeacon of 
Constantinople had read the third Canon of Constantinople. 
Several of the bishops had taken the side of Constantinople, 
and expressed their perfect willingness to subordinate their sees 
to that of the imperial city ; Eusebius of Ancyra, however, 
whilst he proclaimed his willingness to do the same, protesting 
against the pecuniary exactions with which this subordination 
had been accompanied. The commissioners decided that two 
things were plain from the Acts and depositions — first, that 
the primacy {irpwrsla — the very word used in the sixth Nicene 
canon, as cited by the Papal legate) belonged to Old Eome. 
About this there had been no question, and it is obvious that 
the imperial commissioners could decide nothing about that. 
But, secondly, they decided that New Eome ought to have — 
not a primacy such as Eome had, which the whole history of 
the council proves to have involved jurisdiction in the minds 
of all the bishops — but the same honorary privileges, as Eome, 
besides her primacy, and as a consequence of it, also possessed. 
Rome, they had said, possessed two things — honorary pre- 
cedence and primacy ; Constantinople ought to possess in the 
East that honorary precedence which Eome possessed over the 
whole Church. 1 

Thus Constantinople laid the foundation of her desired 
patriarchate over the East, and supplied the premiss from 
which Photius was one day to draw the conclusion in claiming 
universal jurisdiction. 

It is difficult to understand how Mr. Gore could manage 
to see 'Bome's self-assertion* at the bottom of all this. 
Canon Bright also reproduces with approval the sentence in 
which Mr. Gore makes the strange statement, that it is ' more 
than probable [sic] that the self-assertion of Eome excited 
the jealousy of the East, and thus Eastern bishops secretly 

1 irpb Ttamuv p\v ra *p»T€ia Kal tV i£alp€TOV t*/aV xari robs tcavSvas rrjs 
•KpHr&fa&o* 'Pdfirit 9*o$ik*<rrdT<p tyx 1 ** 1 **^? <pv\dm<r6u. I do not see how, in 
view of this undisputed original, it can be maintained, as it is by so many 
Anglican writers, that the legates' version was a forgery. I may mention Canon 
Bright, Canon Carter, Mr. Puller, and the Bishop of Lincoln, as amongst recent 
writers who lay great stress on this imaginary forgery. The Council clearly 
accepted the Papal legate's quotation as accurate. 




446 



THE LEGATES PROTESTED 



a.d. 400 



felt that the cause of Constantinople was theirs.' It most 
have been very 'secretly* felt, for there is not a solitary 
allusion in their speeches to such an idea, whilst they are 
from end to end of the council brimful of acknowledgments 
of the service which Leo had rendered to the Church of God. 
So far as the records go, the bishops, whatever they ' secretly 
felt/ were open in their avowals that, to use their own words, 
4 God has given the synod a champion against every error in 
the person of the Roman bishop, who, like the ardent Peter, 
desires to lead everyone to God/ (Synod's letter to Marcian.) 
St. Nicolas said to Photius, of the crisis which arose in con- 
sequence of the Latrocinium, 4 If the great Leo had not been 
divinely moved to open his mouth, the Christian religion 
would have perished outright.' 

Mr. Gore's suggestion bears, indeed, no serious relation to 
the facts. It may be fairly said of it, as Canon Bright has 
said of a contention of the Ballerini, mentioned above, that 
4 nothing but an intelligible bias could account for a suggestion 
so futile.' 1 The 'self-assertion' was all on the part of Con- 
stantinople. 

The legates entered their protest on the technical ground 
that the Apostolic See had not been consulted as to the dis- 
cussion of this question, 2 and that the proposal was a violation 
of the Nicene canons. They ask that the proceedings of the 
previous day be cancelled, or else that their opposition be 
recorded, c so that we may know what we ought to report to 
the Apostolic man, the Pope of the Universal Church, so that 
he himself may pass sentence on the injury done to his see 
or on the overthrow of the canons ' — the injury done to the 
Holy See by debating the question without its consent, and 
the overthrow of the canons by displacing Alexandria in favour 
of Constantinople. 

In spite, however, of the legates' protest the bishops voted 
the canon. 

The matter could not, of course, stand there. Compara- 
tively speaking, as we have seen, they were but a handful of 

1 Bright's Notes on the Councils, p. 148. 

2 This seems to be the meaning of the legates* words, which are obscure. 
It is most in accordance with what Leo says in his letters on the subject. 




452 



AGAINST THIS ATTEMPT 



447 



bishops, 1 most of them of sees grouped round Constantinople, 
and their leaders far from enjoying the esteem of the Catholic 
world. Their canon was the work ' rather of Greek sophists 
than of Fathers of the Church.' 2 They had adroitly tacked on 
their new claim over three large metropolitanates (which by the 
Nicene Council had been left autonomous) to the third canon 
of Constantinople, so that the new and old parts read like one, 
in which, as Canon Bright remarks, they were more 1 astute 
than candid.' It was not true, as they asserted, that the 
Fathers (if the Nicene Fathers were meant) ' gave ' her (patri- 
archal 3 ) privileges to the See of Eome ; they only recognised 
what was already ancient. It was not true that what the 
Nicene Fathers recognised as ancient custom was due to the 
secular position of the See of Eome. Her privileges were 
settled by herself as See of St. Peter. It was not true that 
the Fathers of Constantinople had bestowed anything in the 
way of jurisdiction, but merely the second rank in the way of 
honorary precedence. It was not true that Constantinople 
had any right over Pontus, Thrace, and Asia Minor. The 
bishops, moreover, enunciated a principle, which had its natural 
sequel in the present subservience of the Greek schism to the 
Czar on the one hand and to the Sultan on the other. 4 It so 
mixed up the movements of the Church and the State as to 
secularise the former and ensconce the latter in the position of 
the real determinant of the Church's jurisdiction. No wonder 
that only about 150 bishops out of the original 600 could be 
induced to sign, and that St. Leo could fearlessly call it an 
'extorted subscription,' even after some few at the session had 
denied that they were compelled to subscribe. St. Leo knew that 
his legates were right in their estimate of the kind of influence 
that had been brought to bear upon these subservient bishops. 
The matter, then, could not rest there. Indeed these bishops 

1 And yet Mr. Puller says that ' the Council, as a whole, passed it ' (Primi- 
tive Saints, p. 20). Canon Bright more correctly speaks of the difference in 
number between these bishops and those who signed the Tome as • significant. 1 

2 Rohrbacher, Hist. vol. iv. p. 539. 

9 There is no indication that these bishops at Chalcedon were professing to 
deal with anything but the patriarchal rights of Borne : her primacy was left 
as it was. 

4 Cf. Rohrbacher, Hist. loc. cit. 




448 



TO OUST THE GREATER SEES. 



a.d. 400 



themselves did not entertain the idea that their act was final ; 
and accordingly they set to work to gain a favourable decision 
from Leo, in spite of his legates' protest. They had the 
emperor on their side, and the game was worth pursuing ; for 
even if they lost in the present, they had taken a step forward 
for the future. 

It is certainly astonishing that writers who are so full of 
Home's supposed ' self-assertion * and ' exorbitant claims ' 
should not only pardon but defend these arrogant pretensions 
of Constantinople. Yet it is the case that the most univer- 
sally accepted writers amongst Anglicans have for the last three 
centuries taken their stand on this canon, and seen in it an 
acceptance, by the Chtirck, of the principle that Rome owed all 
her privileges, not to her relationship to the Apostle Peter, 
and through him to our Lord's institution, but to her secular 
position as the capital of the Roman Empire. How, it may be 
asked, can the Church be identified with these Eastern adven- 
turers, men whose antecedents were in almost every case 
sufficiently suspicious to deprive their judgment on such a 
matter of half its value ? Anatolius, originally secretary to 
Dioscorus, and wavering in the Eutychian troubles ; Juvenal, 
one of the leaders at the Robber Synod, and himself involved 
in an ambitious scheme for the stretch of his jurisdiction ; 
Maximus, who had been irregularly ordained by Anatolius 
himself, his ordination only sanctioned by Leo for the sake of 
peace ; Alexandria vacant ; and the rest, most of them, in no 
position to withstand the pressure which the legates asserted 
had been put upon them by Constantinople — how can these be 
taken to represent the Church ? 

It may be asked, how did the Emperor Marcian come to 
second Constantinople's ambition ? Perhaps the true answer 
is, that he saw in the proposed arrangement certain conveni- 
ences which commended it to his mind from a political point 
of view. 1 And it was undoubtedly the case that the proposed 
arrangement had something in its favour, and might have 
passed muster had it not conflicted with a higher principle of 
action. As things then stood, Constantinople having become 
the actual centre of life in the East, it was certainly a natural 



1 Cf. Hefele, in loco. 




—462 



THE EMPEROR'S ATTITUDE. 



449 



position for a politician to adopt, that the ecclesiastical appa- 
ratus should adapt itself to the new circumstances, and that the 
London of the East should become the root and womb of the 
Church in the future. But Marcian did not see that another 
principle was being introduced, which, if admitted, must have 
been subversive of the Church's spiritual and supernatural 
order, as, indeed, it proved to be under Peter the Czar. When 
Marcian saw this — indeed, as soon as he found that St. Leo 
was opposed to the arrangement — he dropped his patronage of 
the scheme. 1 But the bishops braced themselves to the work 
of persuading Leo that their canon was harmless and worthy 
of his necessary sanction. 



1 Ct. infra, p. 459. 



g a 




CHAPTER XXVII. 



THE EASTERNS' RECOGNITION OF PAPAL SUPREMACY. 

No one will deny the incomparable importance of the letter 
which was now addressed to Leo by the remnant of the synod 
concerning their new proposal. The twenty-eighth Canon of 
Chalcedon is really the sheet-anchor of the Anglican position. 
Relying as that position does on the first four general councils, 
it is maintained that the judgment of the Council of Chalcedon, 
supposed to be expressed in this canon, is sufficient to esta- 
blish the theory that the primacy of the Bishop of Rome was 
considered in the East to be due, not to his relation to St. 
Peter, but to the imperial position of the city of Rome. The 
belief in any real relationship to St. Peter postulates a divine 
origin for the primacy of the Bishop of Rome, for it involves 
the belief that our Lord included that primacy in His words 
to the Apostle. 1 And if the primacy be in any sense divine, 
it is indispensable. No amount of misconduct on the part of 
its representatives can justify us in altering the lines laid 
down by our Divine Lord Himself. But this twenty-eighth 
canon proves, so it is confidently asserted, that the Bishop 
of Rome only held a certain primacy by reason of his being 
Bishop of the Imperial City. He was, so it is said, only 
primus inter pares. Constantinople (it is urged) was placed 
by this canon in the second position on a principle which 
proves that Rome's primacy was one of mere presidency, of 
honour ' without definite powers ' — in a word that the Bishop 
of Rome was only the ' First Patriarch.' 

Now it is important to remember that the Bishop of Rome 

1 Cf. Lanfranc's argument at the Council of Windsor, which assumed that 
the commission to Peter included his successors— an assumption accepted on 
both sides, i.e. by the whole English Church. 




400—462 THE TERMS USED BY THE BISHOPS 



451 



was the first patriarch, and this canon recognises him as such. 
There is no dispute about this. Leo XIII. is to-day not only 
Bishop of Rome, but Patriarch of the West. The fault of the 
so-called twenty-eighth canon, therefore, did not lie in its re- 
cognition of Rome's patriarchal position ; its mistake lay in 
attributing even that position purely to her connection with 
the imperial city, whereas the matter really stood thus : — St. 
Peter selected Rome, and Rome was the capital of the empire. 
His successors reaped the fruit of his wise choice, and utilised, 
as they were meant to do, the advantages of a natural centre. 
Ecclesiastical Rome was able to be what she was because she 
was the See of Peter ; she was also able to do her work at 
first as she did because her influence radiated from the me- 
tropolis of the empire. Her patriarchal sway was subordinate 
to her apostolical jurisdiction ; but it was a reality. It is 
difficult to draw the line between the apostolical and patri- 
archal elements of her position, for the latter is necessarily 
overshadowed, and coloured, and informed by the former ; 
but her relationship to Peter, the prince and head of the 
Apostles, is clear, and occupied an unmistakable place in the 
thoughts of the bishops at Ghalcedon. It was expressed em- 
phatically and in the most precise terms by the comparatively 
few bishops who passed this canon in favour of Constanti- 
nople. The terms which they use in their letter to Leo can- 
not, without doing violence to the laws which govern men's 
minds, be attributed simply to flattery or general Eastern 
courtesy. This, which is the favourite Anglican explanation 
of these bishops' statements, is excluded by the circumstances 
which produced the letter. 1 

The bishops were, it is true, concerned to flatter St. Leo, 
if possible ; they wanted to gain something from him. But 
what they wanted to gain was of that nature that the parti- 
cular terms used by them were the last in the world that they 
would have dreamt of addressing to him at this juncture, 
merely with a view to flatter, even if they supposed that Leo 
was the man to be seduced by honeyed words in a matter of 
such supreme importance. Consider the circumstances under 
which they wrote. Leo had shown himself above all things 



Leonis Ep. xcviii. 



o o 2 




452 UNNATURAL UNLESS THEY BELIEVED a.d. 400 

zealous for the canons of the Church. It was this trait which 
the Emperor Marcian singled out for praise in his encomium 
of the Pontiff during this whole transaction. And the bishops 
at Chalcedon who passed the twenty-eighth canon were, as the 
African bishop Faoundus described them in the next century, 
' astute as serpents.' Is it to be supposed that these astute 
bishops would give away their case by telling St. Leo that he 
was in precisely that position which their canon, according to 
the Anglican interpretation, was concerned to deny or ignore ? 
If they admitted that St. Leo was their 'head,' they were 
admitting that their position next after him was secondary in 
the sense of subordinate, and that their canon was valueless 
without his sanction. If they asserted that St. Leo was the 
instrument whereby the teaching of the Prince of the Apostles 
was made known to them, they were giving away the whole 
position which Anglicans consider essential to their own 
security. Complimentary terms which expressed, in plain 
Greek and Latin, a truth which Leo had all along maintained 
and acted upon, cease to be complimentary in the ordinary 
sense of the term ; they denote the acceptance of the position. 

Now the bishops did tell St. Leo that 4 he was their head, 
and they but members.' What could be their idea in using, 
by way of compliment, such an expression as that? Did 
they suppose that Leo would not take them at their word and 
treat them as members and act as their head ? 

Then, again, they did tell St. Leo that he was their 
* leader ' in the council, through his legates. They used the 
very word which our Lord used to His Apostles when He told 
them that there should be a leader amongst them, and that 
their leader should be as He Himself was in their midst — 
4 Even as I am amongst you ' — not lording it over them, but 
teaching, guiding, governing. Did they suppose that Leo 
would smile at the term and take no advantage of it ? 

Again, they did tell St. Leo that he had been to them 'the 
interpreter of the voice of Peter.' It was, on the Anglican 
supposition, exactly the wrong occasion to say that. They 
were not Eastern heathens addressing heathen rajahs, or 
Hindu suppliants before their conquerors. They were Chris- 
tian bishops — not, it is true, the best specimens ; but still, all 




—452 



IN PAPAL SUPREMACY. 



453 



Eastern as they were, they had not lost all Christian sense of 
truth in spite of their Eastern cunning. On the other hand, 
they knew that it was the teaching of Leo that he was the 
successor of Peter, and as such the ruler of the Christian 
Church. And they were not so utterly devoid of all sense of 
truth, and of ordinary common sense, as to suppose that in 
putting such a weapon into Leo's hand as their own recogni- 
tion of his position as successor of Peter, they would advance 
the cause of Constantinople. Whereas if the Christian world 
held that Leo was their head, their language was natural, for 
then they lost nothing by saying so. 

Again they did tell St. Leo that ' the vineyard had been 
entrusted to him by the Saviour,' in a way which implied that 
he stood in a different relation to that vineyard from the rest 
of the bishops. And they did tell him that he was the 4 father ' 
of Constantinople, and trusted that he would 'extend his 
wonted care over that part of the vineyard.' In fact they as 
much as said there is no such thing as an independent national 
Church. Although we are the East, and under one emperor, 
and you are in the West and under another, still you have 
responsibilities towards the East, and a paternal relation to 
it, and you acted as our ruler in the council, and were the 
interpreter to us of the Prince of the Apostles, and we apply 
to you for that sanction without which our canon can never 
be the voice of the Catholic Church. This was what they 
said. 

Indeed, they said more than this ; for they told St. Leo 
that their own delivery of the truth to the children of the 
Church was but as the flowing forth of a stream from him as 
its apostolic source. * Thou wast constituted the interpreter 
of the voice of blessed Peter to us all, and didst bring to all 
the blessing of his faith. Wlience we also show the inheri- 
tance of truth to the children of the Church.' 1 And hence 
unity of teaching is secured through what they distinctly 
state as the mediatorial position of their head. 

Of Eutyches, who, be it remembered, was deposed by the 
Synod of Constantinople, the Acts of which were sent to Leo, 

1 1 Unde et nos . . . ecclesiae fillis hcereditatem sortemque veritatia ostendi- 
mus ' (Leon. Ep. xcviii. o. 1). 




454 



THEY BEAR TILE MARKS 



A.D. 400 



these bishops say that ' his dignity was taken away by your 
Holiness ' — which is the result arrived at above from a con- 
sideration of the facts. (Gap. 2.) 

And of Dioscorus they say that he meditated an excom- 
munication 'against thee, when thou wast all eager to 
unite the Church/ and 'he repudiated the letter of your 
Holiness.' 

They speak also of being eager to ' confirm ' the mercy of 
the Saviour towards him (which was what Leo had desired 
them to do) — not as if ' confirming ' necessarily implies the 
action of a superior court, but in obedience to their Saviour's 
words. (Cap. 8.) 

They speak of the actual help derived from St. Euphemia 
— 1 God was with us and Euphemia was with us ' — on whose 
altar we know they placed their definition. 

And then they ask that Leo will 'accept and confirm' 
their canon. 

When they mention the legates' opposition to their canon, 
they profess to ascribe that opposition to the idea in the 
legates' minds that everything ought to originate with his 
Holiness, 1 so that even as the right settlement of the faith is 
set down to your account, so also should that of good 
discipline.' They in fact acknowledge that the matter of 
faith was settled by Leo, but they thought that they might 
initiate a matter of discipline, which they had now brought 
before his Holiness for his acceptance and confirmation. 
1 Therefore, we entreat thee, honour the decision with your 
favourable judgment, and as we have introduced harmony 
with the head in the things that are excellent, so the head 
would supply to the children that which is becoming.' 

They have (they say) sent the Acts to Leo, and they 
expressly state that € the force of all ' rests with his confirma- 
tion and ordering. 

Now these are, many of them, positive statements of 
doctrine. Is sentence after sentence to be dismissed as mere 
compliment? Could anything but the exigencies of con- 
troversy have led Dr. Bright and Mr. Gore to disregard all 
these definite statements on the part of the bishops on the 
ground that they were mere compliments ? 




—462 



OF BEING SERIOUS. 



455 



If they were * compliments/ they were those of men who 
found themselves compelled to couch their compliments in 
terms which, if they wished to be independent of Borne, cut 
the ground from under their feet, sentence after sentence. 
They are not in the place in which compliments would come, 
nor are they of the nature of honorific expletives. They form 
the substance of the letter. 

If insincerely used, they testify to the necessity under 
which these bishops found themselves, of crouching at the feet 
of a master in order to gain the object of their desires. If 
used in sincerity, they are the testimony of witnesses, 
naturally the most unwilling, to the position of headship 
which the East recognised in the occupant of the See of 
Peter. We cannot claim for them the authority of the 
council, for these men were not the council ; but we are 
compelled to see in these terms the strongest possible evidence 
that the idea of the connection between Borne and St. Peter, 
and of such a consequent * headship ' of Borne over Constan- 
tinople that the latter could not arrange its own relations with 
other sees in the East without the acquiescence of Borne — we 
are compelled, I say, to acknowledge that this was so deeply 
rooted in the mind of the Eastern Church that it was simply 
useless to ignore it, and that the only thing to be done was 
to admit it plainly and to win the adhesion of Borne to their 
projected canon. 

But side by side with this letter of the bishops is another 
written by Anatolius himself, not less emphatic in its wit- 
ness to the Constantinopolitan conviction as to the Pope's 
supremacy. Anatolius speaks of the bishops at Chalcedon 
having confirmed ' the faith of the blessed and venerable 
Fathers ' of Nicsea, ' and also your Holiness' letter agreeing 
with them ' — showing that the attitude of the synod towards 
the Tome was the same as towards the Nicene faith, and that 
their confirmation of it was an acceptance of an authoritative 
statement. He then says that Bishop Lucentius is bringing 
the Acts of the synod, since ' it was a matter of necessity that 
all things should be brought to the cognisance of your Holi- 
ness.' 1 But beside these things, since some matters were trans- 



1 !8cc iwarra Anryicafof. Leon. Ep. ci. cap. 1. 




456 



THE TRUE IDEA OF THE COUNCIL 



a.d. 400 



acted which specially concerned themselves, 1 and these must also 
of necessity be brought to the knowledge of his Holiness, Anatolius 
says that he sent these letters by the same messengers, to 
receive an answer concerning them. He then mentions the 
acts in order. First came Dioscorus' excommunication, which 
he feels sure will obtain his Holiness' assent. Next (Cap. S) he 
speaks of the reception of the Tome in exact accordance with 
what we have seen above. He says that it was needful that 
' the understanding of all should agree with the meaning of 
your orthodox faith,' and that this was the end for which the 
emperor convened the council — words which are completely 
corroborative of the view of the matter taken in chapter xv. 
Anatolius' words express the object of the session held after 
Dioscorus' excommunication, as that of obtaining an intelligent 
adhesion to the faith as propounded by Leo — ut in recta vestne 
fidei sensurn omnium conveniret intelligentia. Consequently, 
Anatolius says, that with prayers and tears, and with the 
help of Leo himself, assisting in spirit and co-operating by 
means of the well-beloved men whom his Holiness sent to the 
council, and under the protection of St. Euphemia, he and 
those with him had devoted themselves to the work — in 
allusion to the 'instruction* given in Anatolius' house to 
the Hlyrian bishops. And when the time had come for all 
to issue an harmonious definition, they had done so, in 
spite of some contentious opposition from the first, and for 
the confirmation of their definition ' in accordance with that 
holy epistle of yours,' they placed it on the holy altar. 
This latter remark explains the statement of the bishops 
that their definition was offered by Euphemia to her divine 
Spouse. 

So that Anatolius, writing thus publicly an account of the 
synod, emphasises (1) the necessity of agreement with the 
definition of faith issued by Leo, and (2) the necessity of re- 
porting to the Pontiff whatever was done at the synod ; and 
(3) describes the confirmation of their acts by Leo as at once 
necessary for them and free on his part. 9 

1 Sik rb iBuc&s fjfxiy virpaxOal riva — called * negotia privata ' in Pel&gius IL's 
letter to the Istrian bishops. 

* Cf. Leonis Ep. ci., ed. Ballerini, note. 




—452 



DESCRIBED BY ANATOLIUS. 



457 



Having thus described the relation of a council to the 
Pope, in exact accordance with the present teaching of 
Leo XIII., Anatolius proceeds to introduce the subject of the 
canon. He describes it as having for its object the confirma- 
tion of the canon of the 150 Fathers, who decreed that the 
Bishop of Constantinople should have honour and precedence 
(not irpa)Tsia 9 primacy) next after the most holy throne of 
Borne, by reason of her being ' New Koine.' And, he says it 
decided (i.e. the canon drawn up at Chalcedon) that the ordi- 
nation of the metropolitans of the diocese of Pontus, of Asia, 
and of Thrace, should rest with Constantinople ; but that the 
bishops under them should not be ordained, as had been the 
case for sixty or seventy years, by the latter, but by their own 
metropolitans. 

He then complains of the legates' opposition to all this, 
and speaks of the sanction of the emperor. He says that they 
paid all possible respect to the legates, but that they have now 
reported their decision to his Holiness, in hope of gaining his 
assent and confirmation, which they entreat him to give. 
' For the throne of Constantinople has your Apostolic throne as 
its Father, having specially attached itself to you.' And so he 
asks for the ratification of the canon. Later on, 1 the arch- 
bishop tells the Pope that * all the force and confirmation of 
what was thus done was reserved for the authority of your 
Blessedness.' 

Now after these two letters — the one from the enacting 
bishops at Chalcedon, and the other from the Archbishop of 
Constantinople himself, it is idle to talk of the 1 self-assertion ' 
of Rome as having anything to do with the twenty-eighth 
canon. St. Leo doubtless knew how to magnify his office. 
But, indeed, there was no need to do that here; it was 
already done for him. He was recognised publicly and un- 
mistakably by these bishops of the Eastern part of the 
Church as the natural, and, indeed, the necessary guardian of 
the canons of the whole Church, and this, too, in virtue of his 
relationship, through his see, to the blessed Apostle Peter. To 
attribute all this plain dogmatic and public exposition of the 

1 Ep. cxxxii. o. 4 : « Cum et sic gestorum vis oranis et confirmatio auctori- 
tati vestraB beatitudinis fuerit reservata.' 




458 



LEO REJECTS THE CANON, 



a.d. 400 



relationship of the Holy See to the rest of the Church to mere 
courtesy can only be the shift of those who find thepiselves driven 
hard to explain untoward facts. The facts are that the bishops 
who drew up the twenty-eighth canon did avow their entire de- 
pendence on Borne as the See of St. Peter, and that the Arch- 
bishop of Constantinople himself counted the proposal canoni- 
cally null and void without the subsequent confirmation of the 
Bishop of Borne. The explanation proposed and adopted by 
those writers who are out of communion with Borne, and have 
drawn up canons independently of her, is that all this plain 
speech was mere pretence. But something more than a mere 
conjecture is needed to set aside the plain facts of the case. 

The letters of St. Leo in regard to all this are full of 
Christian royalty. Majestic, uncompromising, and tender, 
they would by themselves be sufficient to establish his claim 
to the title which Christendom has accorded to him — Leo the 
Great. 

To Anatolius he wrote, 1 reminding him of the suspicion 
which had originally attached to his orthodoxy, praising the 
faith which he now exhibited, but regretting that he had 
allowed himself to be influenced by the lust of honour and 
power. He blames him for endeavouring to use a council, 
assembled for the matter of faith, for his ambitious projects, 
and for imagining that any number of bishops could override 
the Nicene settlement (cap. 2). He considers that Anatolius' 
blame of the Papal legates is their commendation, for they 
were bound to oppose any infringement of the Nicene canons 
(cap. 3). He says he is sure that Anatolius will please the 
royalties more by self-restraint than by ambition. The deci- 
sion of • some bishops/ sixty years ago, 'never transmitted to 
the Apostolic See/ is no support whatever. (In other words, 
the third canon of Constantinople is of no account.) Alex- 
andria ought not to suffer because of Dioscorus, nor Antioch, 
where Peter first preached, be degraded (cap. 5). The Pontiff 
concludes with most earnestly and lovingly entreating Anato- 
lius to cultivate humility and charity. 

Already * Leo had written to the emperor, severely blam- 



1 Ep. cvi. 



* Ep. civ. 




—462 



AND SENDS LEGATES 



459 



ing Anatolius for not being content with being bishop of the 
royal city, but aiming at the rank of an apostolic see, which 
Constantinople can never become. And he tells the emperor 
that the Nicene arrangement cannot thus be set aside, and 
that in their defence, by the help of Christ, it is necessary for 
him to be a faithful servant unto the end, ' since a dispensa- 
tion has been entrusted to me ' (' dispensatio mihi credita est '), 
' and the guilt will be mine if the rules sanctioned by the 
Fathers in the Synod of Nicaea, for the government of the 
whole Church, by the assistance of the Spirit of God, should 
be violated with my connivance, which God forbid.' 

But as Leo's passing over the ordination of Maximus of 
Antioch by Anatolius might seem to be negligence, he adds 
that he has not rehandled that, out of love for the recovery 
of the faith and desire for peace. 

To Pulcheria he writes 1 in the same strain, saying that he 
renders null and void (' in irritum mittimus ') what the bishops 
agreed to contrary to the Nicene regulations, and that he 
does so by the authority of the blessed Apostle Peter. 

In the following year the emperor wrote to St. Leo, tell- 
ing him that he was unwilling to resort to extreme measures 
with the monks in Palestine until he could show them his 
(Leo's) confirmation of the Chalcedonian definition. He says 
that the Eutychianisers had thrown doubts on that confirma- 
tion. 2 The emperor, in this letter, yields the point of the 
twenty-eighth canon, and expresses his warm sympathy with 
the Pope for the stand he had made on behalf of historical 
veracity and the ancient ways. ' For assuredly,' wrote his 
Imperial Majesty/ ' your Holiness did excellently well, as 
became the Bishop of the Apostolic See, in so guarding the 
canons of the Church, as not to suffer any innovation on 
ancient custom or the order settled of old, and inviolably 
observed to this day.' Considering what Leo had written to 
Marcian, this public acknowledgment of the position of the 
Apostolic See as guardian of the canons, from an Eastern 
emperor who had his desires as to a rise in dignity for his 



9 * Whether your Blessedness has confirmed the things decreed (rvrac$4ma) in 
the synod,' t.6. on the matter of faith and excommunication of Dioscorns. 



1 Ep. CY. 




460 



TO MANAGE ANATOLIUS. a.d. 400-462 



imperial city, and had for a moment been led away by the 
Bishop of Constantinople, is at once a tribute to his real 
goodness and a witness, if farther witness were needed, to 
the ingrained conviction of Christendom that the Holy See 
had a special dispensation committed to it, and that its 
charge was nothing less than the government of the universal 
Church. 

St. Leo left Julian, Bishop of Cos, as his legate at Con- 
stantinople ('vice mea functus*), ' lest either the Nestorian or 
the Eutychian heresy should revive, since there is not the 
vigour of a Catholic in the Bishop of Constantinople.* 1 And 
he wrote to the bishops who had been at Chalcedon to say 
that they could have had no doubt about his approval of what 
had been done at Chalcedon in regard to the faith, had 
Anatolius only shown the letter he had received, which he 
had kept back because of what concerned himself. And he 
says, wherefore ' if anyone shall dare to hold the perfidy of 
Nestorius or Eutyches and to defend the impious dogma of 
Dioscorus, let him be cut off from the communion of 
Catholics.* At the same time they will see from his letters 
to Anatolius with what reverence the Apostolic See deals with 
the regulations of the Nicene Fathers, and that he (Leo) is 
guardian of the faith of our fathers and the canons of the 
Church. 8 

As it is the duty of a king to guard the laws, and himself 
to set an example of their observance, so Leo, as the divinely 
instituted governor of the Christian Church, whilst, for the 
sake of peace, he allowed Maximus, though otherwise tm- 
canonically ordained, to remain in his episcopate, would not 
allow the ambition of a prelate in the imperial city to oust 
Alexandria and Antioch from the position assigned to them 
by the Nicene Fathers, on a principle fatal to the spiritual 
character of the Church, viz. that civil dignity could of itself, 
apart from the action of the See of Peter, raise a see to the 
rank which Alexandria and Antioch then held. 



1 Ep. oxiii. 



* Ep. cxiv. c. 1. 




CONCLUSION. 



The verdict, then, of history, so far as the period dealt 
with above is concerned, is this. In the earliest records of 
the Christian Church agreement with Borne in matters of 
faith is seen to be a principle, clearly announced by St. 
Irenaeus, which does not grow or develop as a substantial 
truth, but which becomes clearer in its action, and more and 
more definitely recognised, as time goes on. The Church 
develops as a whole, and this principle of action does not 
remain stagnant without a proportionate unfolding of ita 
powers. It becomes clearer as the records grow in fulness ; 
and the opponent of Papal supremacy is compelled to take 
refuge only in the absence of record, as at Nicaea, or in the 
plea that occasional resistance to particular acts of authority 
are equivalent to a denial of the authority itself. No imperial 
enforcement of Church laws can account for the existence and 
recognition of those laws as belonging to the Kingdom of God 
before they impressed themselves on the legislature of the 
day ; the Church then became ' in ' the world in a new sense, 
but was none the less not ' of the world. The guardianship 
of the faith was recognised as belonging pre-eminently to the 
See of Peter ; hers was a leadership so pre-eminent, with the 
support of a divine decree, that where, as St. Gregory says, 
' fault is to be found in bishops,' her leadership is, by its 
very nature and of divine appointment, an aprf, a rule, a 
supremacy. 

There is one expression used 1 by a French priest, more 
often quoted by a certain class of respected writers than those 
who are not familiar with Anglican writings would believe to 
be possible. It appears in the last work of a justly esteemed 
writer in the Anglican communion, whose name has been 



1 1 gangrened with fraud/ 




[460] 



CONCLUSION. 



often mentioned in these pages. But he speaks of this French 
priest (P&re Gratry) as 9 noble and truth-loving.' 1 Now this 
4 noble and truth-loving ' priest accepted the Vatican decree 
under peculiar circumstances. He had written against it in 
unmeasured terms, which he lived to regret. In the full 
exercise of his faculties, with the certainty that he must 
shortly stand before his Judge, owing to the rapid inroads of 
a fatal disease, he sent in to his archbishop his submission to 
that decree. He also wrote the following words to a friend : 
4 What I combated was inspired infallibility ; the decree of the 
Council repudiates inspired infallibility. I combated personal 
infallibility; the decree lays down official infallibility. Writers 
of the school which I thought excessive would have no more 
infallibility ex cathedrd, as being too narrow a limit; the 
decree lays down ex cathedrd infallibility. I feared almost 
scientific infallibility, political and governmental infallibility, 
and the decree lays down only doctrinal infallibility in the 
matter of faith and morals. This does not mean that I have 
not committed error in my polemics. I have without doubt 
committed some on this and other subjects ; but so soon as I 
perceive an error I efface it, and do not feel myself thereby 
humiliated.' 2 

It is with the prayer that some may perceive the error 
of opposing the dogma of Papal Supremacy and follow the 
example of this c noble and truth-loving' priest, as Canon 
Bright calls him, that this work has been written. Dominus 
ittuminatio mea. 

1 Waymarks in Church History, by W. Bright, DJX, Begins Professor of 
Ecclesiastical History, p. 241. 

* Souvenirs de ma Jeunesst, par le P. Gratry. (Euvres Posthumes, p. 288. 




APPENDICES. 



APPENDIX I. 



Eev. F. W. Puller's Interpretation of St. Cypricm. 

Mb. Puller says, in reference to St. Cyprian's treatise on Unity, 
and especially the opening passage, * Now, I put it to any candid 
Roman Catholic, Is this the way that he would write on the great 
subject of the Church's unity ? * And again, * You may read the 
whole treatise on Unity from beginning to end, and you will not find 
one single word about Rome, or about the Pope, or about any 
Papal jurisdiction derived from St. Peter.' 1 The argument from 
silence is very freely used by Mr. Puller throughout his book ; but 
it requires an accurate knowledge of the circumstances under 
which a treatise is written to use such an argument with justice. 
The book of Esther does not contain the name of God ; but it does 
not follow that the writer did not believe in God. St. John in 
his first epistle says nothing about the Church, but it does not 
follow that he did not believe in the Church. The question is, 
would it have been ad rem to write about the Papacy in St. 
Cyprian's case? The answer must be, that it would have been 
distinctly beside the purpose of his treatise, if the above estimate 
of that purpose is correct. It would have been nothing less 
than absurd to press the Papal jurisdiction on the Novatianists, 
with whom the question was, not as to the powers of the Papacy, 
but the legitimate occupant of the See of Rome. It would have 
been beside the purpose in the case of the lapsed, when the great 
point was to induce them to repair to their several diocesans for 
the requisite certificates. When Mr. Puller says further on, 2 ' The 
subject of the Church's unity required some treatment of the 
central jurisdiction. So St. Cyprian felt ' — he is simply romancing. 

1 Primitive Saints, &c. p. 351. * P. 353. 




462 



APPENDICES. 



Where is there any evidence that St. Cyprian felt anything of the 
kind at the time when he wrote that short treatise ? 

Just before Mr. Puller says, * Notice how twice over in this 
short passage St. Cyprian insists that St. Peter received no peculiar 
power/ that 4 the other Apostles were what Peter was, endued with 
an equal fellowship both of honour and power. Can anything be 
more frigid and senseless than the Ultramontane reply that St. 
Cyprian is speaking of the power of order and not of the power of 
jurisdiction?' (p. 852). 

Mr. Puller ought to have remembered that amongst these frigid 
and senseless Ultramontanes Bossuet himself must be numbered, 
to say nothing of his own master, Tillemont. But he ought, more- 
over, not to have forgotten that St. Cyprian qualifies the above 
statement when he says, in one of the passages to which Mr. 
Puller refers, that * although he gave the rest equal power, never- 
theless, in order to manifest unity, he by his own authority in- 
stituted the origin of the same unity.' He is speaking, of course, 
of Peter. Why is it frigid and senseless to suppose that, since St. 
Cyprian plainly attributes a primacy of some kind to Peter (and 
Mr. Puller admits thus much), the equality is that of sacerdotal 
power and the difference that of supreme and subordinate juris- 
diction ? 1 Such an obvious explanation may seem * frigid ' to 
Mr. Puller, but to those who make it, it is full of inspiring teach- 
ing, since it shows that our Lord provided for the guardianship of 
unity by an institution whose history is the very history of the 
Church herself. On the other hand, what shall we say of the 
supposition that St. Cyprian knew so little of Holy Scripture as to 
imagine that our Lord consecrated St. Peter to the Apostleship 
first, apart from the others (which is Mr. Puller's curious interpre- 
tation of the Cyprianic teaching 2 ), merely that the Apostles and 

1 Le. whilst they all had jurisdiction, it was to be exercised in subordination 
to St. Peter. 

1 * Some little tune before the others ' (p. 352). ' As we have already seen, 
St. Cyprian held that St. Peter was not only called first, but that he was also 
consecrated first. This notion is doubtless based on a mistake, but it ought to 
be kept in mind if we would understand St. Cyprian aright ' (p. 854). Mr. 
Puller not merely corrects the frigid and senseless interpretations of Ultramon- 
tanes, but convicts St. Cyprian of a blunder of the first magnitude. If St. 
Cyprian blundered in such a vital manner as this concerning St. Peter, what is 
his witness worth ? The fact is that the mistake is Mr. Puller's ; but it was 
necessary that the mistake should have been Cyprian's, else his witness must 
be plaoed on the Papal side. What St. Cyprian held is what Bossuet expressed 
with his usual felicity when he said, in his sermon on the Unity of the Church, 
that our Lord first places all (Apostles included) under Peter by promising him 




APPENDIX I. 



4C3 



others might have an object lesson about unity ? What shall we 
say of the theory that the place of honour assigned to Peter 
(and Mr. Puller says that the 4 stream of Anglican Divines ' assign 
the pre-eminence of leadership to Peter) did not even include pre- 
sidency at a council ? that his relationship to the other Apostles 
was only that of the Duke of Norfolk to the other peers of the 
realm ? 1 I will not call such an explanation 4 frigid ' or 4 sense- 
less/ for that would not advance my argument, but I am bound to 
say it has no warrant in St. Cyprian's actual words. 

Another of Mr. Puller's misinterpretations concerns the crucial 
expression which, as we shall see, St. Cyprian uses of the See of 
Peter, viz. 4 the root ' of the Church, but which Mr. Puller interprets 
of the Church herself. He rightly feels the importance of the 
expression, and informs us that if it could be 4 solidly proved ' that 
the Church of Rome is 4 the centre and the root, the source and 
the matrix of Catholic unity ' (as Father Bottalla correctly says 
it is, according to St. Cyprian), 4 for the first time in my life I 
should begin to fear that the faith which God in His great mercy 
has ever given me in the Catholicity of my mother the Church of 
England has been the result of some illusion.' It is to be hoped 
that Mr. Puller may yet come to see that, so far as the Cyprianio 
literature is taken for evidence of the Church's teaching, it is cer- 
tainly true that the Church of Home is the 4 root of Catholic unity.' 

The word 4 root * is connected by St. Cyprian with three other 
words. Speaking of the Church of Rome, he calls her 4 the head 
and root of the Catholic Church,' 4 the root and womb of the 
Catholic Church,' and 4 the root and mother ' of Catholic unity. 

In using the first of these expressions, he is speaking of Pope 
St. Stephen. • We, who hold the head and root of the one Church, 
know assuredly and are confident that to him ' (i.e. Novatian, the 
anti-Pope at Rome), 'being outside the Church, nothing is lawful ; 
and that baptism, which is one, is with us, where he also himself 
was formerly baptised.' 2 St. Cyprian's argument is that there is 
but one Church, and therefore but one baptism. He was mistaken 

the keys first and alone, and then he says * the sequel does not reverse the 
beginning.' Golden words, which are the equivalent of St. Cyprian's teaching 
that our Lord * provided (disposuit) by His own authority the origin of the 
same unity, beginning from one.' These words are absolutely subversive of 
Mr. Puller's fundamental contention that our Lord made Peter an object-lesson 
of unity ' as being the first-designated Apostle/ and so 1 the symbol of unity ' 
(p. 851). This would not be an exercise of * authority/ nor the origination of 
unity, nor the beginning of a stream, such as St. Cyprian elsewhere describes 
the unity which started with Peter. 

1 P. 229, note 2. • Ep. lxxiii. 2. 

H H 



Digitized by 



464 



APPENDICES. 



in his application of this truth, bat that does not affect the question 
as to the meaning of the expression ' head and root/ There were 
then at Borne two opposed heads. The Novatianists, he had already 
said, had set up an 'adulterous and opposed head without the 
Church.' St. Cyprian repudiated this 'adulterous and opposed 
head/ and says that he, together with Jubaianus, held to ' the head 
and root of the one Church/ is. St. Stephen, the legitimate Pope. 
Consequently (he argues) the baptism of Novatian is invalid. Mr. 
Puller appears to have missed the meaning of these words, from 
imagining that St. Cyprian is arguing with the Novatians. 
He thinks St. Cyprian is contrasting 'himself with Novatian' 
(p. 845, line 18); and he supposes that Novatian might answer, 
' 1 am the Pope ; I am the head and the root of the one Church.' 
But St. Cyprian is not arguing this question at all ; he is engaged 
with a wholly different topic, viz. whether those whom he himself 
and Jubaianus both agreed were outside the Church, could validly 
baptise. It was not a 1 controversy with Novatian ' 1 in which he 
was engaged, but a controversy with certain bishops in Africa, 
destined soon, alas ! to become a controversy with St Stephen him- 
self. Soon — but it had not as yet reached that stage. And con- 
sequently, Mr. Puller's argument * that ' it would have been absurd 
to base his argument in favour of baptising Novatians on his 
fellowship with Stephen, who was treating him 1 (the italics are 
mine) 'as a heretic because he baptised Novatians,' falls to the 
ground. He was doing no such thing. 

Previously to this, St. Cyprian, writing to Cornelius, the Pope, 
speaks of the Novatians as having ' refused the bosom and embrace 
of the root and mother ' 3 — not, as Mr. Puller translates it, ' of her 
who is their root and mother,' but simply ' the root and mother,' 
which is the same as the true ' head,' as he goes on to explain. 
Here we have the head, and root, and mother all in one, as in 
the treatise on the unity of the Church, he says ' there is one head, 
one origin, and one mother,' meaning the Church and Peter, whom 
Christ instituted as ' the origin of unity ; ' and as there he sees in 
the legitimate bishop the Peter for the time being, so here, in 
leaving Cornelius, they had left the true head and taken up (he 
says) with ' an adulterous and opposed head,' and so had ' refused 
the bosom and embrace of the root and mother,' the legitimate 
bishop. For the legitimate bishop is the root of the Church in 
each region, being himself rooted in that past which goes up to 
Peter and to his institution as the rock and key-bearer by Him 
1 hoc. ext. * P. 846. 

■ ' Badicis et matris sinum atque complexum ' (Ep. xlv. 1). 




APPENDIX I. 



465 



Who is the Boot of David, as He is the Bock, and the Father of the 
world to come, His own institution being the mother of us all. 

But on another occasion St. Cyprian supplies an expression 
which is doubtless meant to be understood in the above passage. 
He calls the Church of Borne 4 the root and womb of the Catholic 
Church. 1 1 He is explaining to Cornelius that although he had not 
given those who sailed from Africa to Borne letters to himself, 
whilst there was a doubt, or strife, as to the validity of his election 
to the See of Borne, he had yet in no way opposed him. He had 
told them to 1 recognise and hold to the root and womb of the 
Catholic Church,' whichever that might seem to be on proper 
inquiry. 

Mr. Puller thinks that St. Cyprian meant simply by the above 
expression that the Catholic Church is 4 the root and womb ' to her 
children. And he thinks that ' St. Cyprian's 'advice was evidently 
meant to help them to discriminate/ 2 But this could hardly be 
the case if he merely told them to hold to the Catholic Church. 
How would that help them ? 

The fact is that Mr. Puller has misinterpreted the passage 
through omitting to notice (i.) one important word which he has 
omitted in his translation, 3 and (ii.) from stopping short when he 
ought to have gone to the end of the paragraph. 

St. Cyprian told his people during this period of difficulty (for 
it is obvious that he refers to that alone) that they were to be 
careful to 4 acknowledge and hold to the root and womb of the 
Catholic Church.' No one would talk of acknowledging the 
Catholic Church ; but it is the natural word to use of the bishop, 
who is the root and womb of the Church. 4 It is true that this 
would not help them to know which was the root and womb of the 
Catholic Church ; but neither would bis advice as interpreted by 
Mr. Puller. It was general advice. But St. Cyprian goes on to 
say that no sooner had he gained reliable information as to 
Cornelius' ordination than he had sent letters from all, everywhere 
throughout the province, so that 4 all our colleagues might approve 
and hold to' (compare 4 acknowledge and hold to the root and 
womb ') 4 thee and thy communion, that is as well the unity as the 
charity of the Catholic Church.' I do not know why Mr. Puller 
has separated the two limbs of this paragraph and dealt with them, 

1 Ep. xlviii. 2. « P. 344. 9 P. 343, line 3. 

4 St. Pacian— whose works Dr. Pusey calls 4 further fruits of the mind of St. 
Cyprian, whose writings St. Pacian quotes with reverence ' (Pref. p. xxii), which 
he therefore bound up with St. Cyprian's Epistles in the Lib. of the Fathers — 
calls Cyprian the * root ' of his flock (Ep. ii. 3). 



h h 2 




466 



APPENDICES. 



one on p. 844 and the other on p. 847 ; bat it seems to me that 
through omitting to piece them together rightly, he has himself to 
accuse of 'forgetfulness,' and not Father Bottalla (p. 847, note 8). 
For had he taken the sentence as it stands in St. Cyprian he must, 
one would think, have seen that ' the root and womb of the Catholic 
Church,* which he (the Bishop of Carthage) told his subjects to 
acknowledge and hold to when at Borne, was, in that bishop's 
judgment, after all, Cornelius and his communion, which, on full 
examination, he bade all his colleagues 'approve and hold to,* 
being ' as well the unity as the charity of the Catholic Church.' 

Thus the Church is our mother, but the Church as represented 
and actualized by the See of Peter, which is the root, and head, 
and origin of Catholic unity, on the principles which St. Cyprian's 
language, occasionally obscure and rhetorical, yet unmistakably 
enunciates. 

Once more. Mr. Puller quotes Bossuet as on his side in this 
matter : ' He [Bossuet] understands the radix et matrix, as I do, 
of the Church's unity : — " Cette tige, cette racine de l'unit6 ! " 1 But 
Bossuet makes the 'root' something in the Church, not the Church 
herself — or, to speak more correctly, it is the Church putting her 
self forth in a long chain of teachers within the unity of the chair 
of Peter. ' There is in the Catholic Church a stem, a root, a force 
to reproduce ceaselessly new pastors to fill the same chairs with 
one and the same doctrine.* 2 And then he proceeds to explain 
this root of unity more fully. * There is need of only a little good 
sense and good faith for one to acknowledge that the Christian 
Church has had from its origin for a mark of its unity its commu- 
nion with the chair of St. Peter,' in which all the other " sees have 
preserved unity " (" in qu& sola unitas ab omnibus servaretur " — Opt. 
' c. Parmen.' lib. 11), as the holy Fathers say ; so that by remaining 
therein as we 2 do, without anything being capable of withdrawing 
us from it, we are the body which has seen all those who separate 
themselves fall on the right and on the left. . . . When He [our 
Lord] said to His Apostles "lam with you," St. Peter was there 
with the rest, but he was there with his prerogative as the first of 
the stewards, primus Petrus (Matt. x. 2)— he was there with the 
mysterious name of Peter, which Jesus Christ had given to him 
(Mark iii. 17) to mark the solidity and force of his ministry ; he 
was there, in fine, as he who was to be the first to announce the 
faith in the name of his brethren, the Apostles, to confirm them in 

1 Prim. SS. p. 343, note 1. 

1 He ia contrasting the Catholic (Roman) Church with schismatics. 




APPENDIX I. 



467 



it, and thereby to become the rock on which an " immortal edifice " 
should be built. Jesus Christ spoke to his successors as He spoke 
to the successors of the other Apostles, and the ministry of 
Peter became ordinary, principal, and fundamental in the whole 
Church/ 1 

This is the way in which Bossuet explains the root of unity. 
And in this last passage he gives the truth which corrects Mr. 
Puller's misunderstanding of St. Cyprian and of the general teach- 
ing of the Church. Peter was to have his successor, as the other 
Apostles had theirs ; and if Peter were even merely a symbol and 
object-lesson of unity, we should expect that there would still be a 
successor of Peter distinct from the rest of the Episcopate, were it 
only to keep before our eyes the symbol of unity. As a matter of 
fact, our Lord made him the origin, not merely the symbol, of 
unity, and according to St. Cyprian, he was such, as having a chair, 
a succession — ' the chair of Peter, whence episcopal unity took its 
rise.' 

Mr. Puller's interpretation of St. Cyprian's doctrine comes to 
this : — Our Lord, according to that saint, ordained Peter first, and 
said, as it were, to His Apostles and others : ' Keep before your 
mind the unity of Peter, and how I ordained him by himself, that 
he might be a symbol of unity. He is one man, ordained by him- 
self, and this will teach you unity. It is a picture for you to think 
about, and so keep together. It will always remind you that the 
Church ought to be one/ 



St. Julius, standing in the midst of Eastern bishops, who had 
been driven out by the Eusebians and had taken shelter in Rome, 
' gave back,' says Sozomen, ' to each of them his own Church, in- 
asmuch as the care of all belonged to him by reason of the dignity 
of his see,' or throne. 2 He also wrote the letter quoted above 
(p. 177), blaming the Eusebians for mamtaining in the Council of 
Antioch that the Council of Tyre, which condemned Athanasius, 

1 Instruction Pastorale sur Us Promesses de VEglise ((Euvres, ed. 1816, xxii. 
pp. 423, 424). 

2 oTa 0i rrjs icamey Ktfitfioylas abr$ wpo<ry}Koi<rrjs 8i& tV Qlavrov 0p<W Udffr? 
tV lltlay *EKK\7i<rieu> (Soz. iii. 8). 



APPENDIX H. 



Are the Sardican Canons Nicenet 




468 



APPENDICES. 



was subject to no revision on his (Julius*) part. St. Athanasius 
was Bishop of Alexandria, and as such his case came necessarily 
under the cognisance of Rome. 

In support of this assertion, St. Julius appealed to ' the directions 
of the Fathers,' which ' prescribed* the contrary course to that 
adopted by the Eusebians. He appealed to something ' written ' 
by the Nicene Fathers — in other words, to a Nicene canon. 1 Where, 
then, is this canon containing * the directions of the Fathers ' to be 
found? 

St. Athanasius, who produced this letter of Julius in his own 
behalf, must have known of it. St. Julius knows of no question as 
to its existence and genuineness. The exact contents as described 
by St. Julius are comprised in the ' Commonitorium * of St. Zosimus, 
sent to the African bishops when he commissioned his legate 
Faustinu8 to settle the affair of Apiarius in Africa. St. Zosimus 
called the canons, which embodied the principle for which St. 
Julius was contending, Nicene. 

These canons have, since the seventh century, been called 
Sardican, and the question is, On what ground ? 

There are many reasons for believing that no canons were 
drawn up at Sardica. St. Athanasius, who was present at the 
Council of Sardica, and who professes to give an account of every- 
thing that happened there, says not a word about any canons, and 
his account leaves no room for any. Neither Socrates nor Sozomen, 
although professing to enumerate the acts of the council, make 
mention of any canons. No Pontiff, no one of the Fathers, of that 
century or the next, mentions any canons of Sardica; whilst St. 
Ambrose, 9 dealing with exactly the point settled in the so-called 
Sardican canons, appeals to the regulations of Nicsea, but not to 
Sardica. 

But the most startling evidence against any canons having been 
drawn up at Sardica occurs in a letter of St. Innocent to the clergy 
of Constantinople. 3 The situation was exactly that which is contem- 
plated in the so-called seventh (al. fifth) Sardican canon. Si Chry- 
sostom had been deposed, and had appealed. On his return from 
exile, he had induced the emperor to summon a synod to put 
things right. Theophilus of Alexandria, who had done the mis- 
chief, and been told by the Pope to return to Constantinople and 
hold another synod in accordance with Nicene (or so-called Sar- 
dican) regulations, 4 had sent to Constantinople a copy of the very 

1 Athan. Apol. c. Arianos, n. 22. 2 Ep. lvi. 1 ad Theophilum.' 

» Ep. vii. « Ep. v. ' ad Theophilum.' 




APPENDIX II. 



469 



canon which the Eusebians had originally passed at Antioch, to 
prevent St. Athanasius from ministering again, because of his con- 
demnation by the Council of Tyre. Thereupon, 1 St. Innocent 
joined issue on the subject of this said canon, and said that no 
canons but the Nicene were received by the Church, and these 
countenanced another synod being held. In the same paragraph 
he mentioned the Council of Sardica as having taken the same line, 
but not as having drawn up any canon. His language excludes the 
idea of there being any canons of Sardica. The evidence of this 
letter, if it stood alone, seems to me sufficient to warrant us in con- 
cluding against there having been any actually Sardican canons. 
But it does not, as a matter of fact, stand alone. 

Further, St. Augustine and the African bishops had never heard 
of Sardican canons, though this may be otherwise explained. 

St. Leo sketches the so-called Sardican canons, but calls them 
' decrees of the canons drawn up at Nicaea,' when there was no 
reason for quoting them as Nicene, if they were Sardican, since as 
Sardican they would have been a sufficient authority for his pur- 
pose. 3 The same is true of St. Zosimus, St. Boniface, and St. 
Celestine, all of whom call these Sardican canons Nicene. They 
must have fallen back on the authority of Sardica, in meeting the 
difficulty of the African bishops, had any Sardican canons existed, 
for the Council of Sardica was only not numbered amongst the 
oecumenical councils because it did not deal with any new matter 
of faith but merely confirmed the Nicene. 

Again, the formula used in these so-called Sardican canons is 
unique, except in Africa. They are introduced thus : ' Hosius 
said,' or ' Gratus said.' 

And the introduction of the name of the reigning Pope in the 
third canon (viz. Julius, in some copies Sylvester) is altogether 
without precedent. 

On these and other grounds it seems reasonable to conclude 
that these canons are possibly not Sardican. 

And yet, whatever they were, they have been universally 
received in the Church, having been acted upon in the East, as 
well as in the West, and having been eventually incorporated even 
into the African code of canons, though for a while doubted there. 
John of Antioch incorporated them into the code of his Church in 
the reign of Justinian ; and the Constantinopolitan Council in 
Trullo, assembled to supply canons omitted in the fifth and sixth 



1 Ep. vii. 3. 



* Ep. xliv. 4 ad Theodosium. 1 




470 



APPENDICES. 



General Councils, inserted them in the Oriental code. But the 
most significant piece of evidence is their insertion into the 4 Nomo- 
canon ' of Photius. It is true that Photius, in writing to Pope 
Nicolas, denied that these canons had ever been received at Con- 
stantinople. But it is as certainly true that Photius was telling a 
falsehood. 1 The Pope told Photius in reply that he was unable to 
believe his statement. He would have been able to convict him of 
a barefaced falsehood had he known that Photius had included 
these canons in every one of his successive editions of the canons 
considered to be binding on the whole Church. Theodore Bal- 
•samon, afterwards Patriarch of Antioch, wrote a commentary on 
the work of Photius and included the Sardican canons under those 
received in the East. 8 

Therefore, whatever these canons are, they express the mind of 
the Church as a whole. They can boast of oecumenical reception. 
What, then, is their real origin ? 

Some thirty years ago a theory was started by a professor at 
Borne, named Laigi Vincenzi, which satisfactorily accounts for 
most of the facts of the case. 3 This writer has endeavoured to 
show that in their present form the so-called Sardican canons are 
a commentary, or set of notes, on the Nicene canons by orthodox 
African bishops, the original Greek copies of those canons having 
been mutilated by the Arians. On the one hand we are led by the 
facts to doubt as to any canons having been drawn up at Sardica ; 
on the other hand we are confronted with witness of unimpeach- 
able character to the effect that the Nicene Fathers sanctioned 
certain canons for the guardianship of ecclesiastical discipline and 
with special reference to appeals to the Holy See, which correspond 

1 Photius also coined the Acts of a council, and tried to palm them off on 
the Catholic Church. He forged hundreds of signatures. His forgeries were 
committed to the flames by the eighth General Council. Nevertheless Mr. 
Puller (p. 153) uses his assertion to Pope Nicolas as conclusive evidence, pre- 
facing that evidence with the recommendation that Photius ' was the most 
learned man v/ho had ever sat on that throne.' Possibly he was, but he was 
also the most unscrupulous. 

* Photius wrote first a collection of canons, then an arrangement in order of 
subject (Syntagma), and then a shorter form of the latter. The Sardican canons 
appear in all. The Pope had blamed Photius for reaching the episcopate per 
solium, and had referred to the Sardican canons. Photius replied that these 
had not been received at Constantinople. As a matter of fact, he had quoted 
the tenth canon of Sardica by name under the heading * concerning those who 
become bishops from lay condition/ both in his Syntagma and in his Nomo- 
canon. 

■ De Sacra Monorchia Hsbr. et ChrUtianorum. Rome, 1875. 




APPENDIX II. 



471 



to the provisions of the so-called Sardican canons. And again, in 
their present form these canons wear an African dress. 

This seems to be the only adequate explanation of the passage 
in St. Julius' letter, which St. Athanasius considered so important 
that he incorporated it in his own defence. St. Julius there speaks 
of appeals to the Holy See, in case of difference arising amongst 
bishops, as a ' custom,' and he also calls this 1 custom ' something 
•prescribed by the directions of the Fathers, 1 i.e. the Nicene 
Fathers, and also a custom sanctioned by 1 the Great Synod,' thus 
appearing to indicate that he is referring to the sixth canon of 
Nicsea, which begins with speaking of * ancient customs ' prevailing. 
In its present condition that canon suggests, as has been shown 
above, 1 that Rome had jurisdiction over Alexandria ; but it is only 
as expanded in the so-called Sardican canons that it fully justifies 
the argument derived from it by St. Julius and produced by St. 
Athanasius, himself the Bishop of Alexandria. 

This theory also explains the otherwise inexplicable fact that 
when St. Julius told the Eusebians that they ought to come to 
Home and have their cause tried there (in exact accordance with 
the provisions of the so-called Sardican canons) ; and this, on the 
ground that the Nicene Synod prescribed such a course, the Euse- 
bians did not contradict St. Julius in their reply as to the canon- 
ical mode of procedure. They only made excuses which St. Athana- 
sius calls unworthy of credit (&wi$dvovs) $ such as the stress of cir- 
cumstances and the length of the journey. They had, indeed, as 
St. Athanasius points out, themselves originally proposed to act on 
this very principle of having Julius for their judge (c. 20). 

The explanation of the matter given by Canon Bright and others 
does not satisfy the facts of the case. St. Julius, says that writer 
(the italics are mine), ' when he wrote to the Eusebians that the 
Nicene Fathers decreed that one council's resolutions might be 
reviewed by another [Athan. 1 Apol. c. Ari.' 22], means only that they 
acted on this principle by considering the Arian question de novo 
after it had been determined by the Synod of Alexandria.' 2 But 
St. Julius does not quote the example of the Nicene Fathers ; he 
refers to their ' directions,' and he gives reasons, as does St. Atha- 
nasius, for the utility of the provision, showing that it was an actual 
direction for the future, and he emphasises in particular the special 
provision made in regard to the Bishop of Alexandria (the second 
Petrine See). His words, in fact, suggest the sixth Canon of 'the 

> P. 166, seq. 

a Notes on the Canons of the first four General Councils, 1882. 




472 



APPENDICES. 



great Synod ' (as he calls the Nicene), only in its fuller form, as 
quoted by his successors, and preserved, more or less, in the so- 
called Sardican canons. Indeed, this settlement at Nicsea, as I am 
supposing it to have been, runs through the action and letters of the 
Pontiffs and of the Fathers of the last half of the fourth century to 
an extent that requires some more reasonable explanation than that 
conscientious, high-minded, Christian rulers invented it or hailed 
the invention for their own ends. 

But, further, St. Julius goes on to say that he is speaking of an 
' ancient custom/ which was ' borne in mind and written down ' in 
the Nicene Council. 1 It must then have been a definite regulation 
made in that council, not merely a principle of action to be deduced 
from their example. 

Canon Bright says also : ' Just as the Roman series of canons 
in the fifth century confounded Sardican canons with Nicene, and 
led the Roman bishops, first in ignorance, as in the case of Zosimus 
and Boniface, and afterwards in spite of authentic information (as 
in the case of Leo, Ep. xliii.) to quote as Nicene what was really 
Sardican,' &c. 

It has taken Canon Bright some years to arrive at a theory 
which thus impugns the honesty of the great champion of the In- 
carnation, the ' great ' representative of the Christian religion at 
that era, whose holiness breathes through every line of his sermons 
and letters. In 1877 Canon Bright had only got as far as asking 
the question about St. Leo, ' Can he have known no better ? ' 2 In 
the former passage the question has become an assertion, and St. 
Leo the Great is presented to his readers as a deliberate liar. 

The theory maintained in these pages makes no such demand on 
our moral sense. It requires us to believe, on the contrary, that 
when Pontiff after Pontiff quotes a canon as Nicene, and quotes it 
after it has been questioned as such, it is as good historical evidence 
as can well be obtained that the provision it contains was properly 
called Nicene. 

It was, we may suppose, preserved after a while at Rome only, 
the home of accuracy, the metropolis of canonical lore. The various 
allusions in the letters of St. Julius and (by implication) St. Atha- 
nasius, of St. Ambrose, St. Innocent, St. Boniface, St. Celestine, 
and later on, in Gelasius' letter to Faustus, supply such strong evi- 
dence that there was some Nicene direction (for they all call it 

1 tdos naXcubv rvyxfoov, fivr)fioyfv$iy 8i teal ypaiplv iw fiey&Kp <rvr4ftp 

(toe. dt.). 

2 Cf. Roman Claims tested by Antiquity, p. 11. 




APPENDIX II. 



473 



Nicene) dealing with the question of appeals to Borne, corresponding 
to the provisions of the Sardican canons, that we may fairly suppose 
there has been some foul play in regard to some of the Nicene 
canons. It requires no stretch of imagination to suppose that the 
Arians, when in possession of the Eastern Sees, mutilated or burnt 
some of the canons. They were busy forgers — this we know from 
St. Athanasius. Their successor in heresy, the Emperor Anastasius, 
had the Acts of Chalcedon burnt outright ; a more distant successor, 
Photius, forged a whole council, signatures and all. Borne alone 
was a safe refuge and guardian. Borne alone enjoyed an uninter- 
rupted succession of high-minded orthodox prelates, and the main- 
tenance of the canons of Nicaea was their special boast and glory. 
Their witness is a safer guide than the records of Alexandria and 
Constantinople, after these records had been in the perilous keeping 
of heretical bishops, who did worse things, as a matter of fact, even 
than mutilating records. 

We may therefore safely reject the theory that saintly men like 
St. Innocent or St. Leo, with that uniform and tremendous sense 
of responsibility for the care of all the Churches which pervades 
their writings, were either ignorant of the laws they had to ad- 
minister or deliberately changed their terms. 

At the same time I am far from saying that this, which seems 
to me the most satisfactory, is the only tenable theory. 

It is, I need hardly say, a perfectly tenable theory that these 
Sardican canons, having been passed at Sardica, were considered an 
appendix and explication of Nicene directions, and were, in such 
sense, Nicene. In that case they were launched upon the world 
with the authority of a council which reasserted the Nicene Faith, 
and whose acts received the confirmation of the Holy See. They 
were then part and parcel of the Nicene settlement, being a re- 
assertion or explication of Nicene prescriptions, only not embodied 
in canons at Nicaea, because already considered part of 4 ancient 
custom.' 

At the Council of Florence, Mark, Bishop of Ephesus, when 
asked why the Constantinopolitan Creed was always called Nicene, 
replied, ' Because the latter virtually contains the former.' The 
Constantinopolitan was only a more lucid expression on a mis- 
understood portion of the Nicene Creed. In like manner the Nicene 
canons virtually contained the Sardican. The latter were only an 
authoritative explanation of the Nicene settlement, given to meet 
new emergencies and throw the cover of the Nicene rules over the 
champion of our Lord's Divinity. The Nicene Fathers had said, 
4 Let the Churches preserve their own privileges ; ' the Sardican 




474 



APPENDICES. 



Fathers, many of them the same as at Nicaaa, with the same president, 
explained what these privileges were : namely, that, for instance, 
the Bishop of Alexandria had an appeal to Borne from the Council 
of Tyre. 

And if these canons were really Bardican, one can imagine a 
reason for speaking of them as Nicene to Africans. 1 For the Ease- 
bians at Philippopolis called their meeting the Bardican Council, 
and sent their condemnation of St. Julius, St. Athanasius, and other 
orthodox bishops who had appealed to Borne, to Donatus at Carthage, 
and the Creed drawn up at this schismatic meeting was disseminated 
in Africa. This was what the Africans understood by Bardican, 
and therefore to call these canons Bardican would have been con- 
fusing. They were really (on the supposition which I am entertain- 
ing) Nicene, as confirmed at the true Council of Sardica. In point 
of authority and obligation to obedience they were Nicene. And 
possibly it was the discovery of this that led to the Church of North 
Africa dropping the matter and never returning to it, but eventually, 
when the fire of persecution had burnt out and they had been knit 
closer in bonds of amity to the See of Borne, incorporating them 
into their own African code. 

On the whole, then, Canon Bright's theory may be said to be 
one that is not required by the facts of the case, and is somewhat 
revolting to Christian piety. Of the two counter-theories mentioned 
above, one is quite possible (namely, that these canons were Nicene 
in the same sense that the Constantinopolitan Creed is ever called 
the Nicene Creed), whilst the other (namely, that they were literally 
Nicene, and came, we know not how, to be called Bardican in the 
seventh century) explains all the facts. 

One fact that specially makes for this theory is that St. Julius 
practically acted on a provision of the so-called Bardican canons, 
and that he wrote before the Council of Sardica met. And he called 
the provision one that had been ' written ' in the • great Synod.' 

Note. — The discussion between Borne and Africa as to the Bardican 
canons throws no light on the question treated here, for we have no record 
as to its termination. Indeed, we have only two letters for the whole 
history of this discussion — one from African bishops to St. Boniface ; the 
other to St. Celestine. The latter has every possible mark of forgery 
(cf. p. 808) ; and there are suspicious circumstances about the former. 
For the difference between Borne and Africa, as given in these letters, is 
mentioned nowhere else. Van Espen expresses himself as quite nonplussed 

1 Of coarse there are difficulties in this supposition, as is implied in 'what 
has been said above. 




APPENDIX II. 



475 



in regard to the council from which the letter to Boniface is supposed to 
have emanated. 1 The matter is not mentioned in Prosper's * Chronicon,' 
nor in Possidius* 'Life of St. Augustine,' nor in Marios Mercator, nor 
in Paulinus' 1 Libellus,' nor in Photius* ' Bibliotheca * (c. 52). Further, 
Balsam on gives the supposed letter from St. Cyril and from Atticus of 
Constantinople (accompanying their copies of the Nicene canons), which 
is obviously a translation from the Latin, suggesting that the original was 
a Latin forgery, and containing terminology found nowhere else in Cyril's 
writings. And how was it that Balsamon, himself of Antioch, could not 
produce the letter from Antioch ? It must be admitted that grave sus- 
picion rests on the whole of this supposed discussion. 



St. Ambrose was one of the primitive saints, and a very great 
saint. We have seen that he altogether differs from Mr. Puller on 
some points concerning the See of Borne, holding, as he did, that 
St. Peter was Bishop of Borne (' De Sacr.' i. 5), and that from that 
see * the rights of venerable communion flow forth to all.' (Mansi, 
t. iii. p. 622.) But Mr. Puller has, nevertheless, claimed him as 
being to a certain extent on his side, on the ground that he says 
(Ep. xiii.), in reference (so Mr. Puller imagines) to the disputed suc- 
cession at Antioch, and to a similar difficulty at Constantinople, in 
a.d. 881 or 882, that ' we do not assume to ourselves the prero- 
gative of examining such things, but we ought to have a share in 
their examination.' This he considers moderate as compared with 
later claims ; but Theodosius' answer 1 to the Italians ' (i.e. St. 
Ambrose and his council) decided that such matters should be 
' settled in the East and by the East,' and this Mr. Puller considers 
to be the ' immemorial practice of the Church.' (* Primitive Saints,' 
&c. p. 274.) St. Ambrose says, No. 

Theodosius had succeeded to the entire empire on Gratian's death. 
On his return to Constantinople from the West, he determined to 
make an effort to bring the schism at Antioch to an end. He accord- 
ingly summoned a synod to meet at Borne, and engaged that Flavian 
should attend. Flavian was accordingly summoned to Constanti- 
nople, to sail thence for Borne. He managed, however, to satisfy 
the emperor that he could not be expected to travel thus far in the 
winter season, in his eighty-second year, but promised to attend in 



APPENDIX IH. 



The Bev. F. W. Puller on St. Ambrose. 



1 Jus Eccl. vii. § 10, Art. 2. Lovanii, 1766. 




476 



APPENDICES. 



the summer. The synod was held at Capua, and it was decided 
that both parties, whether they held to Flavian or Evagrius, should 
be considered to be in communion with Borne, so long as they held 
the true faith. The contest concerning the bishopric was remanded 
to the judgment of Theophilus of Alexandria, as having kept himself 
neutral, and the matter was to be confirmed by the Apostolic See. 1 
St. Ambrose, however, discovering that Flavian had ' had re- 
course again to the help of petitions and of imperial rescripts,' 
wrote a more stringent letter to Theodosius, and complained of the 
bishops having had all the trouble of going to Capua for nothing. 
He wrote at the same time to Theophilus, and spoke of Flavian 
as standing ' alone outside the law.' He neither came to Capua 
nor presented himself to the judges provided by the synod. The 
emperor wrote back somewhat sharply, and St. Ambrose replied. 
The letter of the emperor is not extant, and we can only guess at 
what he said from St. Ambrose's reply. The latter says (Ep. xiv.), 
that he must congratulate the emperor on seeming to have restored 
unity between the East and the West. He had summoned a 
council for the purpose. St. Ambrose and the bishops will not, 
they say, enter into the question of whose fault it has been that 
things were disturbed. He is glad that they made the endeavour, 
as it witnessed to their desire for peace. They deny that they could 
be accused of any partisanship, or too great readiness to believe 
either side, and they had met, not for the sake of defining, but of 
instruction. And since they have delegated the matter, they must 
be considered to have sought a just judgment rather than deferred 
to prejudice. The East had themselves wished for the council as 
well, and moreover had themselves set the example in reference to 
Paul, the Presbyter of Constantinople, when they asked for a synod 
within Achaia ; but the West had thought Capua better, because 
they could travel more safely by sea than through Illyricum, which 
was in a state of disturbance (' movebatur '). They say that they are 
not innovating ; they are not removing the landmarks of the Fathers, 
nor violating the rights of the Easterns ; but on the contrary they 
are keeping the things defined by St. Athanasius, of holy memory, 
who was, as it were, a pillar of the faith, and by their holy 
Fathers of old in councils ; neither are they violating the rights 
of hereditary communion, but whilst reserving the respect due to 
the Imperial Majesty, they are showing themselves eager for peace 
and quiet.' 2 

1 Ambros. Ep. lvi. 7. 

* St. Ambrosii Epistol. Classis i. Ep, xiv. Migne, vol xv. The ooonoils 
are obviously Nictea and Sardioa. 




APPENDIX III. 



477 



In an early part of the letter they remind the emperor that they 
had met together to consider also the case of those who tried to 
introduce the teaching of Apollinarius, who ought to be cut off in 
their presence, ' for he who has been convicted in the absence of 
the parties, as your clemency laid down in your august and 
magisterial (principali) reply, will always seize on a handle for 
questioning ' the decision. And then they say that they asked for 
the council that ' no one might be able to compose a falsehood 
against the absent.' 

These bishops, therefore, headed by St. Ambrose, do not admit 
to the emperor that this matter is one of those which must be con- 
cluded in the East, as neither does it appear that the emperor laid 
down the principle that all such matters should be concluded where 
they arose, seeing that he had originally contemplated the appear- 
ance of Flavian before Western bishops — namely, at Borne. 

Tillemont, however, has made a conjecture concerning this letter 
of St. Ambrose which supports his Gallican views of the adminis- 
tration of the Church ; and his conjectures have recently been 
transformed into historical facts by Mr. Puller in his 4 Primitive 
Saints and the See of Rome. 

Tillemont thought, as, indeed, others have, that the above letter 
of St. Ambrose was written d propos of the demand of the Council 
of Milan in 882 for a general council. But a close inspection of 
the letter will probably satisfy most readers that this is an untenable 
theory. For the council to which the letter refers is stated to have 
been summoned, not only to extinguish the Antiochian schism, but 
4 to take cognisance of those who are endeavouring to bring into the 
Church the dogma which Apollinarius is asserted to teach,' and this 
at a time when Illyricum was suspected of being in a state of dis- 
turbance, and therefore the sea journey {i.e. to Capua) was desired 
as being safer. 1 Now this was the state of things when Theodosius 
returned from Italy in 891. The Apollinarian heresy was then 
rising into greater prominence, and the barbarians were coming out 
of their hiding places and causing disturbance in Macedonia and 
Thessaly. Whereas there was no Gothic war nor known disturb- 
ances in Illyricum in 882. Things had been settled in 880. So 
that on these grounds the theory of Tillemont and others will not 
hold. Again, there was no idea of the West having in any way 
behaved reproachfully about the Convocation of the East in 881, as 
this letter of St. Ambrose states of the occasion of the council to 
which it alludes. The East answered the summons of the West 

1 4 Ideo maritima et tutiora quresita sunt * (Ambr. Ep. iv. 3). 




478 



APPENDICES. 



most courteously. So that the letter does not fit into the circum- 
stances of 882. Further, on the occasion of St. Ambrose's letter, 
the West had been summoned by Theodosius, which could not be 
the case until Gratian's death. And since Theodosius could not, on 
Tillemont's theory, have written thus to St. Ambrose until towards 
the end of 882, it seems inconceivable that St. Ambrose should 
have answered in the name of the bishops whom he mentions, and 
not in that of the Roman Synod. Whereas everything fits in with 
the time immediately subsequent to the Synod of Capua, and it 
would seem that the very prominent paragraph about the Apollina- 
rians applies to Vitalis, who had organised the Apollinarian party 
at Antioch, and took refuge under the pretext that he had not been 
condemned in person, which was true, and which was one main 
reason of St. Ambrose's wish for a general council, to which the said 
Apollinari8t bishop, whom I am supposing to be Vitalis, should be 
summoned. 

Mr. Puller, however, has improved on Tillemont. For Tillemont 
adds that what he says about the letter of Theodosius is only 
conjectured from this letter of St. Ambrose. 1 Mr. Puller professes 
to adduce Theodosius' letter itself, and compares it with that of 
St. Ambrose, and then compares the two with the action of Borne 
in 484 in deposing Acacius, and hence deduces ' a proof of the growth 
of the Papal and Italian claims.' 9 He first applies the letter to the 
circumstances of 882 — which, as we have seen, is, to say the least, 
most improbable— and then quotes from another letter of St. Ambrose 
as follows : 1 St. Ambrose and his council expressly say, " We do 
not assume to ourselves the prerogative of examining such things, 
but we ought to have a share in their examination. " ' 

It must be noticed for the sake of English readers that the full 
force of the word ' prerogative ' in the Latin is that of having the 
first vote in a matter, and that St. Ambrose and his council (in 882) 
do not repeat the word ' examination,' but use the word 'judgment 9 
or 1 decision.' They had just said (for we are now back in 882) 
that since Maximus was pleading his cause in the West they (the 
Easterns) ' ought to have waited for our judgment concerning him. 9 
They in effect invoked the Niceno-Sardican canons. They then say 
that in thus claiming that the Easterns ought to have waited for 
the judgment of Borne — for that is what they certainly meant — • 
4 we do not claim the prerogative of examination [i.e. the examina- 

* ' Nous avons tire ces chores par conjecture de la repo se que S. Ambroise 
et sea collogues firent & Theodose ' (Memoir es, vol. x. p. 161). 

* The Primitive Saints and the See of Borne, pp. 278, 274. 




APPENDIX III. 



479 



tion of the matter in the first instance), but there ought nevertheless 
to have been the participation of a common judgment.' It is to be 
noticed that there is no exact equivalent of Mr. Puller's words, 
' such things,' which introduce the idea of a general rule instead 
of confining the sentiment to this particular matter. Mr. Puller 
then proceeds : * The emperor wrote back to the Italians, &c, but 
he does not let his readers know that the emperor's letter is not 
extant, nor that Tillemont, from whom his words are taken, only 
gives them as conjectures. As has been seen above, * the presence 
of the parties,' on which Mr. Puller lays stress, refers in all proba- 
bility not to the affair of Nectarius at all, but to Flavian having 
absented himself on the ground that it was winter- time. But 
Mr. Puller proceeds more boldly still. He informs his readers that 
' there can be no question that the emperor was stating the imme- 
morial practice of the Church, not only in the East, but in Africa 
and elsewhere ; * whereas St. Ambrose goes on to say that, on the 
contrary, there can be, or ought to be, no question that the imme- 
morial practice of the Church has been precisely the other way. 
He instances St. Athanasius, and alludes to the Nicene Fathers as 
being against whatever it was that Theodosius said. It is but fair 
to retort on Mr. Puller what he says of some one else (Prim. SS. 
p. 327) : ' If one may set aside evidence in such a way as that, 
history becomes an impossibility.' 



There is one expression occurring again and again in the Acts 
of the Council of Ephesus, which gives what might be called the 
Christian name of the Bishop of Borne. He is the Archbishop of 
' the Apostolic See, or Throne.' It is curious to notice how some 
writers fight shy of this title. Now Borne is, it is true, according to 
the Acts of the Councils, the Apostolic Throne of Greater or Old 
Borne ; but it is also, what no other is, simply ' the Apostolic See.' 
It is a title accorded to her by emperors, empresses, patriarchs, 
individual bishops, and the entire synod of Ephesus. 

The See of Borne, then, was, in 481, 1 the Apostolic See ; ' hers 
was 1 the ' Apostolic throne ; not, indeed to the exclusion of others, 
but in a super-eminent sense. During the Council of Ephesus, as 
a matter of fact, no other see is called apostolical at all, unless we 
except a doubtful passage in the speech of Juvenal of Jerusalem, 



APPENDIX IV. 



The Apostolic See : Meaning of the Phrase. 



i i 




480 



APPENDICES. 



a propos of the action of John of Antioch, in which he calls his see 
the Apostolic throne of Jerusalem — not simply 4 the Apostolic See.' 

Now, the natural inference from the use of the term 'the 
Apostolic See ' as applied to Rome in the early councils is that the 
apostolicity of the Church in the matter of government was vested 
in the See of Borne, and flowed forth from thence to the rest of 
the sees of Christendom. This is the explanation which St. Leo 
gives in his sermon on St. Peter and St. Paul's Day. Canon Bright 
admits that 4 on the whole, what Borne said in 481 amounts to this : 
All bishops succeed the Apostles, but Celestine, as heir of him who 
was the foremost Apostle, has a right to be foremost among bishops.' 1 
The question is, of course, what constitutes the ' foremost place,' 
and by what sort of ' right ' does Borne hold it ? What did the 
Church at that date mean by so persistently attributing to Borne 
the title * Apostolic ' ? Canon Bright says that in 481 1 Borne did 
not say, as she now practically says, " The apostolic authority is 
concentrated in St. Peter's successor." ' It is not quite plain what 
Dr. Bright means by ' concentrated.' But what is the explanation 
given by the history of the Council of Ephesus ? It is as follows. 

Celestine regarded himself, and was considered by others, as 
occupant of ' the Apostolic See.' As such he considered himself as, 
in a peculiar sense, clothed with apostolic authority, which he could 
exercise, as we have seen, in the way of deposing an Eastern 
bishop, the Bishop of Constantinople, the imperial city. No one 
in presence of the Acts of this council will deny thus much — viz. that 
he spoke of the authority of his see as in some sense pre-eminently 
apostolic, and that bishops (even Capreolus of Carthage * ) speak of 
it as such, and that Celestine regarded his sentence on Nestorius 
as the judgment of God. 

But he regards all the bishops as also true successors of the 
Apostles ; 8 he rejoices in their gathering ; he sees in their assembly 
a visible manifestation of the presence of the Holy Spirit, who is 
given to them all in common. He does not, indeed, say that all are 
equally partakers of the Holy Spirit, from an official point of view : 
that they all equally inherit the duties and graces of the apostolate. 
Dr. Pusey, in his endeavours to find contradictions between Popes 
on matters of faith, says that Celestine, according to the ' Roman * 
theory, must have been infallible when he said to the Council of 
Ephesus (the italics are his own) that — 

4 The charge of teaching has descended [from the Apostles] 
equally upon all bishops. We are all engaged in it by an hereditary 

1 Church History, p. 836, note d. * Cf. Ep. Capreoli ad Syn. Act i. 
1 Cel. Ep. ad Syn. Act ii. 



Digitized by 



APPENDIX IV. 



481 



right ; all we who have come in their stead preach in the name of 
the Lord to all countries in the world, according to what was said to 
them, " Go ye and teach all nations." You are to observe, my 
brethren, that the order (mandatum) we have received is a general 
order or command, and that He intended that we should all execute 
it when He charged them with it, as a duty devolving equally upon 
all. We ought all to enter into the labours of those whom we have 
all succeeded in dignity' 1 

On this Dr. Pusey says, by way of comment, 1 Not the Pope 
alone, but, according to Pope Celestine, the " assembly of priests," 
is the visible display of the presence of the Holy Ghost.' 

Dr. Pusey here gives a turn to Celestine's words which neither 
the Greek nor Latin expresses. Celestine does not say that the 
assembly of priests is ' the visible display/ but merely that it 
1 manifests (c/A</>avi£€i, testatur) the presence of the Holy Ghost,' 
which is true on what Dr. Pusey calls the Ultramontane theory. 
Neither does Celestine use the word * equally ' at all ; he says, ' in 
common/ and a gift received in common may be received in diver- 
sity of share. 

As for its not being ' the Pope alone/ as Dr. Pusey puts it, no 
one ever supposed that the Pope enjoys a monopoly of the gifts of 
the Holy Spirit for the purpose of teaching or governing. The same 
remark applies to what Canon Bright says : 

4 It is certain that Celestine knew nothing of the theory which is 
now called " Ultramontane/' He recognised apostolic authority in 
all bishops alike.' 

It is curious that in the text 2 to which this is a note Canon 
Bright, in giving the applauses of the bishops at the council, omits 
precisely the exclamation which suggests the peculiarity of the 
Pope's position. The bishops called Celestine 'the guardian of 
the faith/ Canon Bright omits that. If by the word 4 alike/ in 
the above note, he means ' equally/ then he is contradicted by the 
whole of Celestine's conduct at the council, and by the ending of 
this very letter. If Dr. Bright does not mean « equally/ viz. that 
all bishops enjoyed, according to Celestine, equal apostolic authority, 
but uses the word ' alike ' simply as redundant, he misinterprets 
the teaching to which he alludes. No Catholic theologian denies 
that the bishops ' all ' enjoy apostolic authority. As Hettinger 
expresses it, 3 4 all received the same authority, but not all in the 

1 Eirenicon, p. 307. 2 Church History, p. 336. 

9 Ct. The Supremacy of the Apostolic See, by Hettinger. Eng. trans. 
Edited by Archbishop Porter, S.J. (Barns & Oates), p. 15. 



x i 2 




482 



APPENDICES. 



same degree or to the same extent.' And, as the same writer ob- 
serves elsewhere, this does not the less make the bishops true 
bishops and true successors to the Apostles. For it will be admitted 
that Timothy and Titus were true bishops, and yet they were under 
apostolic authority. The Apostles had jurisdiction over the uni- 
versal Church ; and yet the bishops appointed by them, under their 
jurisdiction, were true bishops, placed by the Holy Ghost to rule the 
Church of God. The share of the episcopate in the apostolate of the 
Church is thus described by Hettinger : 

* We know where to find the Catholic episcopate, the episcopate 
of the true Church of Christ, by the approbation its teaching re- 
ceives from the Apostolic See ; for where the members are in com- 
munion with their head, there is the unity appointed by God, the 
Catholic Church. . . . The primacy and the episoopacy are both 
holders of the teaching office of the Church, but not ex aquo, on d 
par. The head must teach the members and oblige them to accept 
his teaching ; but the converse does not hold/ 1 

Bossuet, who insisted strongly on the apostolic authority of all 
bishops, nevertheless writes : 

'When Christ chose St. Peter to be the foundation of His 
Church, He created for him a superiority in the Church and con- 
ferred on him the fullest plenitude of authority and majesty, that he 
might keep all bound together in unity/ ' And he tells us that 
Celestine acted in the persuasion that he alone could judicially deal 
with Nes tonus. 

So that Dr. Pusey has no ground for translating Celestine's 
expression 'in common,' as though it were 'equally; ' and Canon 
Bright is mistaken in supposing that our attribution of special 
authority to the Holy See annihilates the apostolic authority of the 
rest of the episcopate. And each of these writers is mistaken in 
supposing that St. Celestine held the equality of all bishops in their 
possession of the teaching office. They held it, according to St. 
Celestine, in common, but not in equal measure. 3 

1 Op. tit. Part 2, oh. xviii. » Def. Decl. Cler. Gall. xxi. 

* Since writing the above I have noticed that Canon Bright translates 
Celestine's expression in the same way that Dr. Pusey does, as though he said 
that the teaching office 1 had descended equally to all bishops ' {Roman Claim* 
tested by Antiquity, p. 11, note). St. Celestine says in common. ' Common 
Prayer ' does not mean that Priest and people who pray are officially equal. 




INDEX. 



Aettos, of Constantinople, reads the 
third Canon of Constantinople (not 
the sixth of Nicsea), 443 

Africa, causes of bishops not to be 
terminated there, 142, 143 ; ac- 
cepted Papal Infallibility, 289, 
296 ; forbade inferior clergy to 
appeal to Rome, 297; deprecated 
legates a latere, 299; supposed 
letter to the Pope, probably spu 
rious, 303 

Alexandria, a see of Peter, 120 ; why 
above Antioch, 125; jurisdiction 
of, 167 ; subject to Rome, 177 ; 
Council of, 195 ; Acts sent to Rome, 
197 

Allies, T. W., 173 

Ambrose, St., Bishop of Milan, on 
Damasus' election, 204 ; Gratian's 
adviser, 235, 237 ; teaching on the 
See of Peter, 242 ; at Aquileia, 264 ; 
at Rome, 273 ; contradicted by Mr. 
Puller, 479 

AnatoliuB, Bishop of Constantinople, 
submits to Leo's demands, 393-396 ; 
signs the Tome and sends it round, 
397; instructs bishops at council, 
414 ; defends an inadequate for- 
mula, 419 ; grasps at supremacy in 
the East, 440 ; favouring circum- 
stances, 441 ; his letter to Leo on 
the synod, 455 

Anthony, Bishop, 301 

Antioch, a see of Peter, 120; its re- 
lation to Rome, 123 ; to Alexandria, 
126 ; Council of, 176, 179 ; dissen- 
sions under Meletius, 193 

Apiariu8, African priest, deceived the 
Pope, 297 

Apollinarius, his heresy detected by 
Damasus, 212; condemned at 
Rome, 276 

Aquileia, Council of, 264 

Aries, Marcian, Bishop of, 70 



i Aries, Council of, 144 ; not superior to 
the Pope, 146 ; British bishops at, 
146 ; regulation of Easter, 147 ; 
Archbishop Laud on the Council, 
149, 152 

| Ascholius, St., baptises Theodosius, 
243; Papal vicar, 246; meeting 
| St. Ambrose, 273 
1 Athanasius, St., and Julius' letter, 
| 175, 178 

| Augustine, St., on Peter's primacy, 
83 ; on Cyprian's speech, 93 ; 

| opinion of St. Stephen, 113 ; on the 
Donatists, 140 ; on Melchiades' 
judgment, 141, 142 ; on the See of 
Peter, 143; on the Donatists' ap- 
peal, 144, 147; misinterpreted 
by Laud, 149; at Milevis, 287; 
letter to Pope Innocent, 288 ; his 

| belief in Infallibility of the Holy 
See, 290 ; as Papal legate, 300 

I Auxentius, Bishop, 209 



' Bardebanes, 26 

| Basil, St., tender to Apollinarius, 211 ; 

\ looks to the West, 213 ; wishes for 

| Papal legates, 214 ; letter of com- 
plaint as to Damasus, 220; on 

i Western superciliousness, 222 ; re- 
cognises special grace in the Holy 
See, 224 ; admits Pope's power over 

, Eastern bishops, 225 ; and to con- 
secrate Bishop of Antioch by le- 
gate, 225 
Basilides, Bishop, 73 
Bigg, Dr. , on the Clementine literature, 
30 

Bossuet, on principalitas, 36 ; on 
Victor and Irenteus, 43 ; on the 
Papal sentence against Nestorius, 
335 

| Bottalla, Father, S.J., on relation of 
1 bishops to the Pope, 330 



Digitized by 



484 



INDEX. 



Bright, Dr. W., on convenire ad, 35 ; 
on Infallibility, 155 ; on 6th Nioene 
Canon, 171 ; quoted, 262 ; inade- 
quate version of Celestine's judg- 
ment on Nestorius, 814 ; misunder- 
standing, 880; description of the 
sentence at Ephesus, 336 ; on John 
of Antioch's delay, 341; on the 
legate's speech at Ephesus, 349; 
on a supposed allusion to the Pope, 
358 seq. ; accusation of forgery, 
445 ; translation of communis, 483 



Caccilian, Bishop of Carthage, 139 
seq. 

Canons, sixth of Nioaa, 166 ; of Sardica, 
178, 183 note; why Popes quote, 
183; third of Constantinople, 258 
seq. ; Nioene quoted as Sardican, 
298, 302 ; third of Constantinople 
readatChaloedon,443; sixth Nioene 
only once, 444 ; twenty-eighth of 
Chalcedon, how carried, 441 seq, 

Capreolus, Bishop of Carthage, letter 
on authority of Holy See, 317, 
860 

Carter, Canon, accusation of forgery, 
445 

Carthage, third Council about baptism, 
89 ; letter to Pope Innocent, 286 

Celestine, St. (Pope), 299 ; his cha- 
racter, 306, 311 ; letter condemning 
Nestorius, 809 ; real president at 
Ephesus, 821 ; his judgment on 
Nestorius accepted as authoritative, 
334, 335 ; last letters, 354 

Chalcedon, Nioene Canon at, 170. 
See Leo, Anatolius, Dioscorus,Theo- 
doret, Maxim us 

Chrysologus, St. Peter, advises Euty- 
ohes to obey the Pope, 367 

Church of Borne, authority same as 
that of the Bishop, 4 

Church, the Catholic, its head and 
root, 85 ; her unity, 118, 119 

Clement, St., of Borne, letter to 
Corinth, 1 seq. 

Clementine literature, description, 12 ; 
used by Tubingen school, IS; by 
anti-papal writers, 13 ; not the 
parent of phrase 4 See of Peter,' 16 
seq. ; subsequent to list of HegeBip- 
pus, 17-22 ; subsequent to Tertul- 
lian, 25 ; and Bardesanes, 26 ; reason 
of its acceptance at Borne, 31 

Ccelestius, the Pelagian, 285 ; deceived 
the Pope, 292; was condemned, 
295 



Constantino, his wish for a council, 
157 

Corinth, Epistle of St. Clement to, 1 ; 
its effect, 32 

Cyprian, St., treatise on Unity, reasons 
for writing, 50, 55 ; teaching as to 
Peter, 49, 54, 55 ; on the chair of 
Peter, 57 ; meaning of 4 the head,' 61 ; 
on difference between orders and 
jurisdiction, 62 ; on Fortunatus 
going to Borne, 69 ; on Marcian of 
Aries, 70; deposition of Basilides, 
78 ; on baptism by heretics, error, 
77 ; on tradition, 82 ; expression 
4 bishop of bishops,' 92; his irrita 
tion, 99 ; summary by St. Vincent^ 
112 

Cyprus, decision about, at Ephesus, 
wrong, 856 

Cyril, St., of Alexandria, why inter- 
vened about Nestorius, 306; ap- 
peals to the Pope for judgment, 
308; presided for the Pope, 321 
seq. ; presided after the legates* 
arrival, 350 ; sent by Celestine to 
preside, 348; his summary of the 
council, 351 ; defended by the 
synod, 353; praised by Celestine, 
355 ; and by Sixtus, his successor, 
356 ; his authorised letters accepted 
at Chalcedon, 411. See Ephesus. 



Damasus, St. (Pope), his greatness, 
203 seq. ; election valid, 207 ; his 
rule, 208; estimate of Liberius' 
stand, 209; detection of Apol- 
linarius, 211 ; and Maoedonius, 212 ; 
his belief as to his see, 213; de- 
fined the Divinity of the Holy 
Ghost, 214; differed from Basil as 
to a legation, 215 ; annoyed Basil, 
219 ; cool towards Meletius, 227 : 
his religion as successor of Peter 
enforced in the East, 244, 247 ; on 
Maximus, 248 ; changes his opinion, 
266; action in a.d. 382, 269; his 
glory, 278 

Dionysius, St., of Borne, acts as 
supreme ruler, 122; on Homoou- 
sioe, 156 

Dionysius, St., of Alexandria, inter- 
cedes with the Pope, 81 ; letter for 
guidance, 114; defends himself to 
the Pope, 122 

Diosoorus, Bishop of Alexandria, 
moves for a council, 368 ; presides 
at Ephesus, 879 ; acquitted Euty- 
ches, 379 ; has to leave his seat at 



Digitized by 



TNDEX. 



485 



Ghalcedon, 400 ; sentenced by the 
Papal legates, 404 
Dollinger, Dr., translation of St. Igna- 
natius, 33 ; on principalitas, 36, 
58 ; on communion with Rome, 38 ; 
on excommunication, 41 ; on Peter's 
primacy, 61 ; on Firmilian's letter, 
100 ; on the sees of Peter, 125 ; on \ 
the peace at Antioch, 232 ; on the ! 
Pope as patriarch, 262 ; absurd no- ] 
tion of infallibility, 310; correct i 
appreciation of Cyril's relation to 
Celestine, 313 | 
Domnus, Bishop of Antioch, 433 
Donatists, their origin, 139; ask for ! 
Gallic judges, 140 ; their appeal to 1 
the emperor, 144 ; their action 
misinterpreted by Laud, 149 I 



Ephesus, Council of (a.d. 431), due to 
Nestorius, 316; and to the em- 
peror, 319 ; Celestine the president, | 
321 ; Cyril acted for him, 322 ; use 
of term * Apostolic See ' at Council I 
of, App. IV. 479 I 

Ephesus, Bobber Council of (a.d. 449), i 
not wished by Flavian, 369 ; Euty- , 
ches' plan, 368 ; why consented to 
by Leo, 375, 377 ; its constituents, I 
378 ; Flavian condemned, 379 ; ap- 
pealed to Borne, 380; ill treated, 
380 

Epiphanius, St., on St. Clement's 

succession, 5, 21 ; at Borne, 273 
Eusebians, their programme, 177, 179 
Eusebius, on St. Clement's letter, 7 ; 

Papal lists, 19 seq. ; on the Council 

of Nicaea, 157 
Eusebius of Constantinople, 174 
Eusebius of Vercellfe, Papal legate, 

194 ; at Antioch, 199 
Eustathius, St., Bishop of Antioch, 

191 

Eutyches, his teaching, 365; con- 
demned by his bishop, 365; ap- 
peals to Borne, but not at the synod, 
367 ; gains the emperor, 367 ; in 
concert with Dioscorus, moves for a 
council, 368 ; brings charges against 
his synod, 370 ; condemned by Leo, 
373 ; acquitted at the Latrocinium, 
379; his acquittal rendered null 
and void by the Pope, 385. See 
Flavian and Leo 

Excommunication, different kinds, 41 ; 
of Asiatics by St. Victor, 42; of 
Marcian by the Pope, 71 ; of Fir- 
milian, 81 ; lesser kind, 105 ; autho- 



rities against Cyprian's, 107; esp. 
St. Augustine, 109 



Faustinus, Papal legate, 299 ; not in- 
fallible, 300 

Firmilian, 98 ; his letter, 101 ; pro- 
bably altered his teaching, 111 

Flavian, St., of Antioch, 253, 265 

Flavian, Bishop of Constantinople, 
condemns Eutyches, 365 ; writes to 
the greater sees, but sends the Aots 
to Borne, 367 ; accepts censure 
from Leo, 369 ; prefers Papal brief 
to a general council, 369, 370 ; ac- 
cepts legates from Borne, 373; 
murdered, 380; had appealed to 
Borne, 383 

Francis of Sales, St., on Peter qud 
foundation, 49 

Freppel, Bishop, summary of Cypri- 
anic dispute, 115 



Gelasius of Cyzicus, value of his 
lists, 163 

Gore, Bev. C, refutation of Lightfoot, 
7 ; interpretation of Irenaeus, 36 ; 
his depreciation of Leo, 418 ; mis- 
interpretation of Leo, 439 ; curious 
suggestion, 446 

Gratian, Emperor, his attitude to the 
Church, 234 ; relationship to St. 
Ambrose, 235 ; gave civil effect to 
ecclesiastical judgments, 236; his 
rescripts conterminous with eccle- 
siastical arrangements, 237 seq. 

Gregory, St., of Nazianzus, 245, 248 ; 
election confirmed, 249 ; opposes 
the election of Flavian, 252; re- 
signs, 255 



Hegesippcs, 17, 21, 30 

Homoousios (Consubstantial), taught 

by St. Dionysius, 156 
Hosius, Bishop, Papal legate at Nice, 

163 



Ignatius, St., on St. Clement's letter, 
2, 19; the Church of Borne pre- 
siding, 33 

Illyrian bishops at Chalcedon, their 
difficulty, 417 

Infallibility, Papal, involves concur- 
rence of the Church, 3 ; taught by 
Irenaeus, 38 ; implied by Cyprian, 
72 ; not inconsistent with Nicene 



Digitized by 



486 



INDEX. 



Council, 154 ; nor with Basil's words 
about Meletius, 220; accepted by 
the Church of North Africa, 290 ; 
assumed by Leo in writing to Theo- ( 
dosius, 387 ; Dr. Ddllinger on in- 
fallibility, 417 

Innocent L, St. (Pope), letters to j 
Africa, 288; claim to infallibility 
received in Africa, 290 

Irenaus, St., on St. Clement's letter, , 
2, 9; list of Popes, 22; on the 
sovereignty of the Church of Rome, 
34-38 



Jerome, St., on St. Peter's episcopate, 
21 ; on Liberius, 187 ; witness to 
Papal supremacy, 227 ; his age, 
228 ; at Borne, 273, 277 

John, Bishop of Antiooh, counsels 
Nestorius to obey the Papal judg- 
ment, 315; his delay intentional, 
320; holds a schismatic synod, 341 ; 
refuses to attend the council, 352 ; 
his deposition reserved to Borne, ' 
353 

Jubaianus, Cyprian's letter to, 85 

Julian, Bishop, Pelagian, 317 ; wishes 
for a council, 318 i 

Julius, St. (Pope), letter to the Euse- 1 
bians, 175 | 

Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, on obe- ' 
dience to Borne, 352 ; wrests pro- 
vinces from Antioch, 435 | 



LATROciNruM, i.e. Bobber Synod. See 

Ephesus, Flavian, Diosoorus, Leo 
Laud, Archbishop, mistranslation, 150 
Leo the Great, St. (Pope), blames 
Flavian, 367 ; judges Eutyches in 
his Tome, 373 ; revises the Acts of j 
the Eastern Synod, 373; consents 
to a council, 375 ; describes his 
Tome to the Archimandrites as ex 
cathedrd, 376; and to the synod, 
ibid. ; annulled the sentence on Eu- 
tyches, 885 ; acts on the Sardican | 
Canon, 3S5 ; expounds Papal In- i 
fallibility to the emperor, 387 ; his 
demands on Anatoh'us, 393, 396; \ 
his Tome accepted as authoritative, 
409; difficulty of some bishops ! 
about it, 413 ; instructed in com- I 
mittee, 414 ; free to examine, not ; 
to dissent, 416 ; Tome the rule of 
faith, 420 ; called by the synod 'the i 
preaching of the See of Peter,' 422; 
Marcian's allocution on the Tome, i 



425 ; absolved Theodoret, 427 ; ac- 
tual restoration left to the synod, 
430; rejects the twenty-eighth 
Canon as contrary to Nicene Canons 
by virtue of his apostolic authority, 
458-460 

Liberius, St. (Pope), his support of 
Athanasius, 186 ; his lapse not 
proven, 187; his acts, 188; his 
second stand, 189 ; after Ariminum, 
190 

Lightf oot, Dr., on St. Clement's letter, 
3, 8 ; on the Clementine literature, 
14 ; on Hegesippus' list, 21 ; trans- 
lation of St. Ignatius, 33 

Lincoln, Bishop of, on the Clementine 
Bomanoe, 14, 25 ; on Nicene Council, 
168 ; unsubstantiated accusation of 
forgery, 445 

Linus, successor of St. Peter, 19, 21, 
22 

Littledale, Dr., on Damasus, 205 
Lucifer, St., of Cagliari, Papal legate. 
194 ; consecrated Paulinus to An- 
tioch, 199 
Luciferians, 198, 206 



Mabcellus of Ancyra, 223 

Marcian, Bishop of Aries, 70 

Marcian, Emperor, why called a 
Council, 391-392; first supports, 
then gives up, the twenty-eighth 
Canon, 448, 459 

Maximus of Constantinople, 246; 
ordination rejected, 249 ; appears in 
the West, 275 

Maximus, Bishop of Antioch, his or- 
dination validated by the Pope, 433 ; 
Eastern acceptance of Papal supre- 
macy, 434; agrees to Juvenal's 
desire conditionally upon Leo's con- 
sent, 436 

Melchiades, St., Bishop of Borne, his 
judgment on African bishops, 141 ; 
misrepresented by Laud, 149 

Meletius, St., Bishop of Antioch, his 
election, 191 ; exile, 192 ; statement 
before Sapor, 194; dealt with at 
Alexandria, 195 ; Damasus cool to- 
wards, 227 ; compact with Paulinus, 
when made, 229; at peace with 
Borne (a.d. 379), 230 ; at Constanti- 
nople, 248 ; last acts and death, 250 ; 
proof that he died in communion 
with Borne, 267 

Memnon, Bishop of Ephesus, held 
Nestorius condemned before the 
council, 319 



Digitized by 



INDEX. 



487 



Milan, Council of, 265 
Milman, Dean, on the sentence of the 
Council of Ephesus, 337 



Nectarius, Bishop, 255 

Nestorius, his character and teaching, 
306 ; idea of the council, 316 ; ac- 
cused St. Cyril, 319 

Nicaa, Council of, reasons for, 151 ; 
its president, 161 ; St. Boniface on, 
165; sixth Canon, 166; supposed 
forgery, 171 ; directed from Borne, 
210 ; are the Sardican Canons Ni- 
cene? 467 seq. 

Norfolk, Duke of, not a type of the 
Pope, 224 



Optatus, St., of Africa, on communion 
with Rome, 38, 274 



Paschal Feast, dispute on, 39 seq. 
Paschasinus, Papal legate, pronounces 

the deposition of Dioscorus, 405 
Paul, St., relationship to See of Borne, 

23 

Paul of Samosata, his case referred 
to Borne, 123 

Paulinus, Bishop of Antioch, 192; 
position sanctioned at Alexandria, 
195 seq. ; ordained by three bishops, 
199 ; compact with Meletius, 229 

Pelagius, his heresy, 284 

Peter, St, ordained Clement, 19 ; re- 
lationship to the See of Borne, 23 ; 
Church built on, 47, 49, 60 ; place 
of, 55 ; chair of, 57, 67 ; primacy 
over Apostles, 83 ; three sees of, 
120; mention of in the Sardican 
Canons, 180, 182 

Philip, Papal legate at Ephesus, his 
exposition of Papal supremacy, 344 ; 
its acceptance by the synod, 347 

Photius, of Constantinople, on Hosias, 
163 ; his falsehood and forgeries, 470 

Poiycrates, 41 

Popes, their witness, 129 seq. 

Pulcheria, Empress, 389; beauty of 
character, 391 ; her joy at Anatolius' 
submission, 396 

Puller, Bev. F. W., on the Clementine 
Romance, 14, 15, 25 ; on principalis 
tas, 36 ; on St. Victor, 40, 42, 44 ; 
translations of Eusebius, 42, 46; 
on St. Cyprian, 47, 53 ; translation 
of sacerdotalis unites, 58, 59; of 
primattis, 83 ; Old Testament teach- 



ing on unity compared with Cy- 
prian's, 66 ; on going from Carthage 
to Borne, 69 n. 2 ; translation of con- 
sulere red, 76 ; on the head and root 
of the Church, 85 ; on Stephen's 
excommunication of Cyprian, 106- 
111 ; mistake as to the sees of Peter, 
126; repudiation of Popes as wit- 
nesses, 127 ; on the Nicene Council, 
164 ; on Bixth Canon, 167 ; on the 
Meletians at Antioch, 196 n.l ,197 n.3; 
note on his account of Meletius, 
201 ; depreciation of Dainasus, 205 ; 
on election of Damasus, 207 ; argu- 
ment from titles unsound, 215 n. 2 ; 
on hcplfaia, 217 n. 2 ; mistaken idea 
of papal teaching, 223 ; makes Gra- 
tian's Rescript wider than Rome's 
request — wrongly, 237 seq. ; on the 
Council of Aquileia, 264 n. 2 ; mis- 
translation, 267; collapse of his 
argument aboot Meletius, 268 ; con- 
tradicts St. Ambrose, 271, 479 ; on 
North African Church, 283; as- 
sumption aboot African obedience, 
302; on Philip's words at Ephesus, 
350 ; on the Cyprian dispute, 357 ; 
accusation of forgery, 445; inter- 
pretations of Cyprian, App. I. 461- 
467 ; on St. Ambrose, App. m. 475 
Pusey, Dr., argument about infalli- 
bility, 154 ; misunderstanding, 157 ; 
on Church of North Africa, 284; 
mistakes about St. Zosimus, 291 
seq. ; answered by St. Augustine, 
293; account of the Council of 
Ephesus, 319 ; on John of Antioch's 
delay, 341 ; translation of communis, 
483 



Bxcoonitions, the. Cf. Clementine 

literature 
Borne, Church of. See Church 
Borne, See of, relation to St. Peter 

and St Paul, 23, 24 ; the Apostolic 

See, 118, App. IV 



Salmon, Dr., tone of Clement's letter, 
8, 11 ; his use of the Clementine 
literature, 13 ; undue • depreciation 
of Council of Ephesus, 320 ; on the 
presidencies of councils, 321 ; ig- 
noring Celestine's work, 327; de- 
preciation of Nicene Council, 332 ; 
argument from resistance, 338 

Sardica, Canons of, their meaning, 
178 seq., 183 note ; quoted as Nicene, 



Digitized by 



488 



INDEX. 



298, 802 ; acted on by Leo towards the 
East, 385 ; are they Nioene? 467 seq. 

Stephen, St. (Pope), asked to depose 
Marcian, 70 ; restores Basilides, 73 ; 
St. Vincent of Lerins on, 81 ; his 
letter to Cyprian, 89 ; his decree, 
96 ; and the African legates, 97 ; i 
his excommunication of Cyprian 
not proved, 107 seq. 

Sylvester, St. (Pope), his action to- , 
wards the Donatists, 146; sat in , 
seat of the Apostles, 147 ; reason 
for accepting a Council, 158, 161 | 



Tbrtullian, not deceived by the Cle- 
mentine Romance, 17 ; not con- 
tradicted by Irenaeus, 23 ; definition 
of principalitas, 58 

Theodore t, bishop and historian, ac- 
count of compact at Antioch, 229 ; 
not allowed to judge Dioscorus, 
401 ; acted as judge of the faith at 
Chalcedon, 431 ; synod did not re- 
view Papal judgment on, 432 

Theodosius I., Emperor, enforces the 
faith of Borne, 244 ; decides on an 
Eastern (Ecumenical Council, 246 ; 
second edict (a.d. 881), 247 

Theodosius II., idea of the council 
at EphesuB, 319; takes Eutyches 
under his patronage, 367 ; appointed 
Dioscorus president at Ephesus, 
379; ordered the presence of Bar- 



sumas, 378; refuses to convoke 

another council, 888 
Timothy, of Alexandria, 254 
Tyana, Synod of, admits Pope's power 

to restore Eastern bishops, 225 
Tyre, Council of, 176, 179 



Ursinus, schismatic, 207 



Valentinian, Emperor, letter to 
Theodosius on Papal jurisdiction, 
389 

Victor, St., 40 seq. 

Vincent of Lerins, St., estimate of 
Stephen, 81 ; on the Donatists' use 
of Cyprian's name, 98; summary 
of Cyprian's case, 112 ; never men- 
tioned by Mr. Puller, 112 

Vitalis, Bishop, at Antioch, 218 



Ward, Wilfrid, 224 

Wordsworth, Bishop Christopher, 147 ; 
on the Ephesine sentence, 337 



Zobimus, St. (Pope), caution as to 
CkBlestius, 294 ; did not approve his 
heresy, 298 ; Marius Mercator, 294 ; 
his ex cathedrd teaching, 296; 
received Apiarius, 298; quoted 
Nicene Canon, 298 



PRINTED BT 
8 POTTB WOODB AND CO., NXW-BTREET SQUARE 
LONDON 



Digitized by 



Carbfnal fliewman's Works, 



SERMONS. 

PAKOCHIAL and PLAIN SERMONS. Edited by the Rev. 

W. J. Copeland, B.D. late Rector of Farnham, Essex. 8 vols. Cabinet 
Edition. Crown 8vo. 5s. each. Popular Edition. 8 vols. Crown 8vo. 
3*. 6d. each. 

SELECTION, adapted to the SEASONS of the ECCLE- 
SIASTICAL YEAR, from the 4 Parochial and Plain Sermons.' Edited by 
the Rev. W. J. Copeland, B.D. late Rector of Farnham, Essex. Cabinet 
Edition. Crown 8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. Zt. 6d. 

FIFTEEN SERMONS PREACHED before the UNIVERSITY 

of OXFORD, between 1826 and 1843. Crown 8vo. 5*. Popular Edition. 
Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. 

SERMONS BEARING upon SUBJECTS of the DAY. Edited 

by the Rev. W. J. Copeland, B.D. late Rector of Farnham, Essex. Crown 
8vo. 5*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d. 

DISCOURSES ADDRESSED to MIXED CONGREGATIONS. 

Crown 8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. 

SERMONS PREACHED on VARIOUS OCCASIONS. Crown 

8vo. 6». Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3». Gd. 

TREATISES. 

LECTURES on the DOCTRINE of JUSTIFICATION. Crown 

8vo. 6s. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3s. 6d. 

An ESSAY on the DEVELOPMENT of CHRISTIAN 

DOCTRINE. Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 
8vo. St. 6d. 

The DDEA of a UNIVERSITY DEFINED and ILLUSTRATED. 

Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 7t. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3*. 6d. 

An ESSAY in AID of a GRAMMAR of ASSENT. Cabinet 

Edition. Crown 8vo. 7s. 6d. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3#. 6d. 
POLEMICAL. 

The VIA MEDIA of the ANGLICAN CHUBCH. Illustrated 

in Lectures, Letters, and Tracts written between 1830 and 1841. With 
Notes. Vol. I. Prophetical Office of the Church. Vol. II. Occasional Letters 
and Tracts. Cabinet Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 6s. each. Popular 
Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Zs. 6d. each. 

CEBTAIN DIFFICULTIES FELT by ANGLICANS in 

CATHOLIC TEACHING CONSIDERED. Cabinet Edition. (2 vols.) Vol.1. 
Twelve Lectures. Crown 8vo. Is. 6d. Vol. II. Letters to Dr. Pusey concern- 
ing the Blessed Virgin, and to the Duke of Norfolk in Defence of the 
Pope and Council. Crown 8vo. 5*. 6d. Popular Edition. (2 vols.) 3s. 6d. each. 

The PRESENT POSITION of CATHOLICS in ENGLAND. 

Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. It. 6d. Popular Edition, St. 6d. 

APOLOGIA PRO VITA SUA. Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 

6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. St. 6d. 

London: LONGMANS, GEEEN, & CO. 



Digitized by 



Cabdinai. Newman's Wobks (continued). 



ESSAYS. 

ESSAYS on BIBLICAL and on ECCLESIASTICAL MIRACLES. 

Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3*. M. 
DISCUSSIONS and ARGUMENTS on VARIOUS SUBJECTS. 

Cabinet Edition. Crown 8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3f . 64. 
Contents.— 1. How to accomplish it. 2. The Antichrist of the Fathers. 
3. Scripture and the Creed. 4. Tamworth Reading Boom. 5. Whoa to Blame t 
6. An Argument for Christianity. 

ESSAYS CRITICAL and HISTORICAL. Cabinet Edition. 

2 vols. Crown 8vo. 12*. Popular Edition. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 7s. 
Contents.— 1. Poetry. 2. Rationalism. 3. Apostolical Tradition. 4. De la 
Mennais. 5. Palmer on Faith and Unity. 6. St. Ignatius. 7. Prospects of the 
Anglican Church. 8. The Anglo-American Church. 9. Countess of Huntingdon. 
10. Catholicity of the Anglican Church. 11. The Antichrist of Protestants. 
12. Milman's Christianity. 13. Reformation of the Eleventh Century. 14. Private 
Judgment. 15. Davison. 16. Keble. 

HISTORICAL. 

HISTORICAL SKETCHES. 8 vols. Cabinet Edition. Crown 

8vo. 6*. each. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3f. 64. each. 
Contents.— 1. The Turks. 2. Cicero. 3. Apollonius. 4. Primitive Christianity. 
5. Church of the Fathers. 6. St. Chrysostom. 7. Theodoret. 8. St Benedict. 
9. Benedictine Schools. 10. Universities. 11. Northmen and Normans. 12. 
Mediaeval Oxford. 13. Convocation of Canterbury. 

THEOLOGICAL. 

The ARIANS of the FOURTH CENTURY. Cabinet Edition. 

Crown 8vo. 6#. Cheap Edition. Crown 8vo. 3#. 64. 

SELECT TREATISES of ST. ATHANASIUS in CON- 

TROYERSY with the ARIANS. Freely Translated. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. 16*. 

THEOLOGICAL TRACTS. Crown 8vo. 8*. 

Contents. — 1. Dissertatiuncula. 2. On the Text of the Seven Epistles of 
St. Ignatius. 3. Doctrinal Causes of Arianism. 4. ApoUinarianism. 5. St. Cyril's 
Formula. 6. Ordo de Tempore. 7. Douay Version of Scripture. 

LITERARY. 

VERSES on VARIOUS OCCASIONS. Cabinet Edition. Crown 

8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3#. 64. 

LOSS and GAIN : the Story of a Convert. Cabinet Edition. Crown 

8vo. 6*. Popular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3#. 64. 

CALLISTA : a Tale of the Third Century. Cabinet Edition. 

Crown 8vo. 6*. Pupular Edition. Crown 8vo. 3#. 64, 

The DREAM of GERONTIUS. 16mo. 6d. sewed ; U. cloth. 
DEVOTIONAL. 

MEDITATIONS and DEVOTIONS. Part I. Meditations for 

the Month of May. Novena of St. Philip. Part II. The Stations of the 
Cross. Meditations and Intercessions for Good Friday. Litanies, Sec. 
Part III. Meditations on Christian Doctrine. Conclusion. Oblong Crown 
8vo. 5i. net. 

London: LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO. 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Google 



