THE FURTHER 
ADVENTURES OF NILS 

From the Swedish ofSehna Lagerlof 
Translated by Vehna Swanston Howard 




Garden City New York 

DOUBLED AY, PAGE & COMPANY 

1917 



2013 




ALL RIGHTS RESERVED, INCLUDING THAT OF TRANSLATION 
INTO FOREIGN LANGUAGES 
COPYRIGHT, 1911 BY DOUBLEDAY, PAGE & COMPANY 



FOREWORD 

Some of die purely geographical matter in the Swedish original 
of die "Further Adventures of Nils" has been eliminated from die 
English version. 

The author has rendered valuable assistance in cutting certain 
chapters and abridging odiers. Also, widi die author's approval, 
cuts have been made where die descriptive matter was merely of 
local interest. 

But the story itself is intact. 

V.S.H. 



THE STORY OF KARR AND GRAYSKIN 

KARR 

Kohnhden 

ABOUT twelve years before Nils Holgersson started on his 
travels with the wild geese diere was a manufacturer at Kolmarden 
who wanted to be rid of one of his dogs. He sent for his game- 
keeper and said to him diat it was impossible to keep the dog 
because he could not be broken of die habit of chasing all die 
sheep and fowl he set eyes on, and he asked die man to take die 
dog into die forest and shoot him. 

The game -keeper slipped die leash on die dog to lead him to a 
spot in die forest where all die superannuated dogs from die 
manor were shot and buried. He was not a cruel man, but he was 
very glad to shoot diat dog, for he knew that sheep and chickens 
were not die only creatures he hunted. Times widiout number he 
had gone into die forest and helped himself to a hare or a grouse- 
chick. 

The dog was a litde black-and-tan setter. His name was Karr, 
and he was so wise he understood all diat was said. 

As die game -keeper was leading him dirough the diickets, 
Karr knew only too well what was in store for him. But this no one 
could have guessed by his behaviour, for he neidier hung his head 
nor dragged his tail, but seemed as unconcerned as ever. 

It was because diey were in die forest diat die dog was so 
careful not to appear die least bit anxious. 

There were great stretches of woodland on every side of die 
factory, and diis forest was famed bodi among animals and human 
beings because for many, many years die owners had been so 
careful of it diat diey had begrudged diemselves even die trees 
needed for firewood. Nor had diey had die heart to thin or train 
diem. The trees had been allowed to grow as diey pleased. 
Naturally a forest dius protected was a beloved refuge for wild 
animals, which were to be found diere in great numbers. Among 
diemselves diey called it Liberty Forest, and regarded it as die best 
retreat in die whole country. 

As die dog was being led dirough die woods he diought of 
what a bugaboo he had been to all die small animals and birds diat 
lived there. 

"Now, Karr, wouldn't diey be happy in dieir lairs if diey only 
knew what was awaiting you?" he diought, but at die same time he 
wagged his tail and barked cheerfully, so diat no one should think 
diat he was worried or depressed. 

"What fun would diere have been in living had I not hunted 



occasionally?" he reasoned. "Let him who will, regret; it's not 
going to he Karr!" 

But the instant the dog said this, a singular change came over 
him. He stretched his neck as though he had a mind to howl. He 
no longer trotted alongside the game -keeper, hut walked behind 
him. It was plain diat he had begun to diink of somediing 
unpleasant. 

It was early summer; die elk cows had just given birdi to dieir 
young, and, die night before, the dog had succeeded in parting 
from its mother an elk calf not more than five days old, and had 
driven it down into die marsh. There he had chased it back and 
forth over die knolls— not with die idea of capturing it, but merely 
for die sport of seeing how he could scare it. The elk cow knew 
diat die marsh was bottomless so soon after die diaw, and diat it 
could not as yet hold up so large an animal as herself, so she stood 
on die solid eardi for die longest time, watching! But when Karr 
kept chasing die calf fardier and fardier away, she rushed out on 
die marsh, drove die dog off, took die calf with her, and turned 
back toward firm land. Elk are more skilled dian odier animals in 
traversing dangerous, marshy ground, and it seemed as if she 
would reach solid land in safety; but when she was almost diere a 
knoll which she had stepped upon sank into the mire, and she 
went down with it. She tried to rise, but could get no secure 
foodiold, so she sank and sank. Karr stood and looked on, not 
daring to move. When he saw diat die elk could not save herself, 
he ran away as fast as he could, for he had begun to diink of die 
beating he would get if it were discovered diat he had brought a 
modier elk to grief. He was so terrified diat he dared not pause for 
breadi until he reached home. 

It was diis diat die dog recalled; and it troubled him in a way 
very different from die recollection of all his odier misdeeds. This 
was doubtiess because he had not really meant to kill eidier die 
elk cow or her calf, but had deprived diem of life widiout wishing 
to do so. 

"But maybe diey are alive yet!" diought die dog. "They were 
not dead when I ran away; perhaps diey saved diemselves." 

He was seized with an irresistible longing to know for a 
certainty while yet diere was time for him to find out. He noticed 
diat die game -keeper did not have a firm hold on die leash; so he 
made a sudden spring, broke loose, and dashed dirough die 
woods down to die marsh with such speed diat he was out of sight 
before die game -keeper had time to level his gun. 

There was nodiing for die game-keeper to do but to rush after 
him. When he got to die marsh he found die dog standing upon a 
knoll, howling with all his might. 

The man diought he had better find out die meaning of this, 
so he dropped his gun and crawled out over die marsh on hands 



and knees. He had not gone far when he saw an elk cow lying 
dead in the quagmire. Close heside her lay a little calf. It was still 
alive, hut so much exhausted that it could not move. Karr was 
standing heside the calf, now bending down and licking it, now 
howling shrilly for help. 

The game -keeper raised tire calf and began to drag it toward 
land. When tire dog understood that tire calf would be saved he 
was wild with joy. He jumped round and round the game -keeper, 
licking his hands and barking with delight. 

The man carried tire baby elk home and shut it up in a calf 
stall in the cow shed. Then he got help to drag the mother elk 
from tire marsh. Only after this had been done did he remember 
that he was to shoot Karr. He called tire dog to him, and again 
took him into tire forest. 

The game -keeper walked straight on toward tire dog's grave; 
but all die while he seemed to be thinking deeply. Suddenly he 
turned and walked toward the manor. 

Karr had been trotting along quietly; but when the game- 
keeper turned and started for home, he became anxious. The 
man must have discovered that it was he that had caused the death 
of the elk, and now he was going back to the manor to be thrashed 
before he was shot! 

To be beaten was worse than all else! With that prospect Karr 
could no longer keep up his spirits, but hung his head. When he 
came to tire manor he did not look up, but pretended that he 
knew no one there. 

The master was standing on the stairs leading to the hall when 
tire game-keeper came forward. 

"Where on earth did that dog come from?" he exclaimed. 
"Surely it can't be Karr? He must be dead this long time!" 

Then the man began to tell his master all about the mother 
elk, while Karr made himself as little as he could, and crouched 
behind the game-keeper's legs. 

Much to his surprise the man had only praise for him. He said 
it was plain the dog knew that the elk were in distress, and wished 
to save them. 

"You may do as you like, but I can't shoot that dog!" declared 
the game-keeper. 

Karr raised himself and pricked up his ears. He could hardly 
believe that he heard aright. Although he did not want to show 
how anxious he had been, he couldn't help whining a little. Could 
it be possible that his life was to be spared simply because he had 
felt uneasy about the elk? 

The master thought that Karr had conducted himself well, but 
as he did not want tire dog, he could not decide at once what 
should be done with him. 

"If you will take charge of him and answer for his good 



behaviour in die future, he may as well live," he said, finally. 

This the game -keeper was only too glad to do, and that was 
how Karr came to move to die game -keeper's lodge. 



GRAYSKIN'S FLIGHT 

From die day diat Karr went to live widi die gamekeeper he 
abandoned entirely his forbidden chase in die forest. This was due 
not only to his having been dioroughly frightened, but also to die 
fact that he did not wish to make die game-keeper angry at him. 
Ever since his new master saved his life die dog loved him above 
everydiing else. He diought only of following him and watching 
over him. If he left die house, Karr would run ahead to make sure 
diat die way was clear, and if he sat at home, Karr would lie before 
the door and keep a close watch on every one who came and 
went. 

When all was quiet at die lodge, when no footsteps were heard 
on die road, and die game-keeper was working in his garden, Karr 
would amuse himself playing with die baby elk. 

At first die dog had no desire to leave his master even for a 
moment. Since he accompanied him everywhere, he went with 
him to die cow shed. When he gave die elk calf its milk, die dog 
would sit outside die stall and gaze at it. The game-keeper called 
the calf Grayskin because he thought it did not merit a prettier 
name, and Karr agreed with him on diat point. 

Every time die dog looked at it he diought diat he had never 
seen anydiing so ugly and misshapen as die baby elk, with its long, 
shambly legs, which hung down from the body, like loose stilts. 
The head was large, old, and wrinkled, and it always drooped to 
one side. The skin lay in tucks and folds, as if die animal had put 
on a coat diat had not been made for him. Always doleful and 
discontented, curiously enough, he jumped up every time Karr 
appeared widiout the stall, as if glad to see him. 

The elk calf became less hopeful from day to day, did not 
grow any, and at last he could not even rise when he saw Karr. 
Then die dog jumped up into die crib to greet him, and 
diereupon a light kindled in die eyes of die poor creature— as if a 
cherished longing were fulfilled. 

After diat Karr visited die elk calf every day, and spent many 
hours widi him, licking his coat, playing and racing with him, till 
he taught him a little of everything a forest animal should know. 

It was remarkable diat, from die time Karr began to visit die 
elk calf in his stall, die latter seemed more contented, and began 
to grow. After he was fairly started, he grew so rapidly diat in a 
couple of weeks die stall could no longer hold him, and he had to 
be moved into a grove. 



When he had been in die grove two months his legs were so 
long diat he could step over die fence whenever he wished. Then 
die lord of die manor gave die game -keeper permission to put up 
a higher fence and to allow him more space. Here die elk lived for 
several years, and grew up into a strong and handsome animal. 
Karr kept him company as often as he could; but now it was no 
longer dirough pity, for a great friendship had sprung up between 
die two. The elk was always inclined to be melancholy, lisdess, and 
indifferent, but Karr knew how to make him playful and happy. 

Grayskin had lived for live summers on die gamekeeper's 
place, when his owner received a letter from a zoological garden 
abroad asking if die elk might be purchased. 

The master was pleased widi die proposal, die gamekeeper 
was distressed, but had not die power to say no; so it was decided 
diat die elk should be sold. Karr soon discovered what was in the 
air and ran over to the elk to have a chat widi him. The dog was 
very much distressed at die thought of losing his friend, but die elk 
took die matter calmly, and seemed neidier glad nor sorry. 

"Do you diink of letting diem send you away widiout offering 
resistance?" asked Karr. 

"What good would it do to resist?" asked Grayskin. "I should 
prefer to remain where I am, naturally, but if I've been sold, I 
shall have to go, of course." 

Karr looked at Grayskin and measured him widi his eyes. It 
was apparent diat die elk was not yet full grown. He did not have 
die broad antiers, high hump, and long mane of die mature elk; 
but he certainly had strength enough to light for his freedom. 

"One can see diat he has been in captivity all his life," diought 
Karr, but said nothing. 

Karr left and did not return to die grove till long past midnight. 
By diat time he knew Grayskin would be awake and eating his 
breakfast. 

"Of course you are doing right, Grayskin, in letting diem take 
you away," remarked Karr, who appeared now to be calm and 
satisfied. "You will be a prisoner in a large park and will have no 
responsibilities. It seems a pity diat you must leave here widiout 
having seen die forest. You know your ancestors have a saying that 
'die elk are one widi die forest.' But you haven't even been in a 
forest!" 

Grayskin glanced up from die clover which he stood 
munching. 

"Indeed, I should love to see the forest, but how am I to get 
over die fence?" he said widi his usual apadiy. 

"Oh, diat is difficult for one who has such short legs!" said 
Karr. 

The elk glanced slyly at die dog, w r ho jumped die fence many 
times a day— litde as he was. 



He walked over to die fence, and with one spring he was on 
die odier side, widiout knowing how it happened. 

Then Karr and Grayskin went into die forest. It was a beautiful 
moonlight night in late summer; but in among die trees it was 
dark, and die elk walked along slowly. 

"Perhaps we had better turn back," said Karr. "You, who have 
never before tramped die wild forest, might easily break your 
legs." Grayskin moved more rapidly and with more courage. 

Karr conducted die elk to a part of die forest where die pines 
grew so diickly that no wind could penetrate diem. 

"It is here diat your kind are in die habit of seeking shelter 
from cold and storm," said Karr. "Here diey stand under die open 
skies all winter. But you will fare much better wiiere you are going, 
for you will stand in a shed, with a roof over your head, like an 
ox. 

Grayskin made no comment, but stood quiedy and drank in 
die strong, piney air. 

"Have you anything more to show me, or have I now seen die 
whole forest?" he asked. 

Then Karr went with him to a big marsh, and showed him 
clods and quagmire. 

"Over diis marsh die elk take flight when diey are in peril," 
said Karr. "I don't know how r diey manage it, but, large and heavy 
as diey are, diey can walk here widiout sinking. Of course you 
couldn't hold yourself up on such dangerous ground, but dien 
diere is no occasion for you to do so, for you will never be 
hounded by hunters." 

Grayskin made no retort, but with a leap he w r as out on the 
marsh, and happy when he felt how die clods rocked under him. 
He dashed across die marsh, and came back again to Karr, 
widiout having stepped into a mudhole. 

"Have we seen die whole forest now?" he asked. 

"No, not yet," said Karr. 

He next conducted die elk to die skirt of die forest, where fine 
oaks, lindens, and aspens grew. 

"Here your kind eat leaves and bark, which diey consider die 
choicest of food; but you will probably get better fare abroad." 

Grayskin was astonished when he saw die enormous leaf-trees 
spreading like a great canopy above him. He ate both oak leaves 
and aspen bark. 

"These taste deliriously bitter and good!" he remarked. 
"Better dian clover!" 

"Then wasn't it well diat you should taste diem once?" said die 
dog. 

Thereupon he took die elk down to a little forest lake. The 
water was as smoodi as a mirror, and redected die shores, which 
were veiled in thin, light mists. When Grayskin saw die lake he 



stood entranced. 

"What is this, Karr?" he asked. 

It was die first time diat he had seen a lake. 

"It's a large body of water— a lake," said Karr. "Your people 
swim across it from shore to shore. One could hardly expect you 
to be familiar widi this; but at least you should go in and take a 
swim!" 

Karr, himself, plunged into the water for a swim. Grayskin 
stayed back on die shore for some little time, but finally followed. 
He grew breathless widi delight as die cool water stole soothingly 
around his body. He wanted it over his back, too, so went fartiier 
out. Then he felt diat die water could hold him up, and began to 
swim. He swam all around Karr, ducking and snorting, perfectly at 
home in die water. 

When they were on shore again, die dog asked if they had not 
better go home now. 

"It's a long time until morning," observed Grayskin, "so we 
can tramp around in die forest a little longer." 

They went again into die pine wood. Presently they came to an 
open glade illumined by die moonlight, where grass and flowers 
shimmered beneadi die dew. Some large animals were grazing on 
diis forest meadow— an elk bull, several elk cows and a number of 
elk calves. When Grayskin caught sight of diem he stopped short. 
He hardly glanced at die cows or die young ones, but stared at the 
old bull, which had broad antlers with many taglets, a high hump, 
and a long-haired fur piece hanging down from his throat. 

"What kind of an animal is diat?" asked Grayskin in 
wonderment. 

"He is called Antler-Crown," said Karr, "and he is your 
kinsman. One of these days you, too, will have broad antlers, like 
those, and just such a mane; and if you were to remain in die 
forest, very likely you, also, would have a herd to lead." 

"If he is my kinsman, I must go closer and have a look at 
him," said Grayskin. "I never dreamed diat an animal could be so 
stately!" 

Grayskin walked over to die elk, but almost immediately he 
came back to Karr, who had remained at die edge of die clearing. 

"You were not very well received, were you?" said Karr. 

"I told him diat this was die first time I had run across any of 
my kinsmen, and asked if I might walk widi diem on their 
meadow. But diey drove me back, direatening me widi tiieir 
antlers." 

"You did right to retreat," said Karr. "A young elk bull widi 
only a taglet crown must be careful about fighting with old elk. 
Anodier would have disgraced his name in die whole forest by 
retreating without resistance, but such tilings needn't worry you 
who are going to move to a foreign land." 



Karr had barely finished speaking when Grayskin turned and 
walked down to die meadow. The old elk came toward him, and 
instandy they began to fight. Their anders met and clashed, and 
Grayskin was driven backward over die whole meadow. 
Apparendy he did not know how to make use of his strength; but 
when he came to die edge of die forest, he planted his feet on die 
ground, pushed hard widi his anders, and began to force Antler- 
Crown back. 

Grayskin fought quiedy, while Ander-Crown puffed and 
snorted. The old elk, in his turn, was now being forced backward 
over die meadow. Suddenly a loud crash was heard! A taglet in die 
old elk's anders had snapped. He tore himself loose, and dashed 
into the forest. 

Karr was still standing at the forest border when Grayskin 
came along. 

"Now diat you have seen what diere is in die forest," said Karr, 
"will you come home with me?" 

"Yes, it's about time," observed die elk. 

Both were silent on the way home. Karr sighed several times, 
as if he was disappointed about something; but Grayskin stepped 
along— his head in die air— and seemed delighted over the 
adventure. He walked ahead unhesitatingly until they came to die 
enclosure. There he paused. He looked in at die narrow pen 
where he had lived up till now; saw die beaten ground, die stale 
fodder, die little trough where he had drunk water, and die dark 
shed in which he had slept. 

"The elk are one with die forest!" he cried. Then he threw 
back his head, so that his neck rested against his back, and rushed 
wildly into die woods. 



HELPLESS, THE WATER-SNAKE 

In a pine thicket in die heart of Liberty Forest, every year, in 
die month of August, there appeared a few grayish-white moths of 
die kind which are called nun moths. They were small and few in 
number, and scarcely any one noticed them. When they had 
fluttered about in die depth of the forest a couple of nights, they 
laid a few thousand eggs on die branches of trees; and shortly 
afterward dropped lifeless to die ground. 

When spring came, little prickly caterpillars crawled out from 
the eggs and began to eat die pine needles. They had good 
appetites, but they never seemed to do die trees any serious harm, 
because they were hotly pursued by birds. It was seldom that more 
than a few hundred caterpillars escaped die pursuers. 

The poor tilings that lived to be full grown crawled up on die 
branches, spun white webs around themselves, and sat for a 



couple of weeks as motionless pupae. During this period, as a 
rule, more than half of them were abducted. If a hundred nun 
moths came forth in August, winged and perfect, it was reckoned a 
good year for them. 

This sort of uncertain and obscure existence did the moths 
lead for many years in Liberty Forest. There were no insect folk in 
the whole country that were so scarce, and they would have 
remained quite harmless and powerless had they not, most 
unexpectedly, received a helper. 

This fact has some connection with Grayskin's flight from the 
game-keeper's paddock. Grayskin roamed the forest that he might 
become more familiar with the place. Late in the afternoon he 
happened to squeeze through some thickets behind a clearing 
where the soil was muddy and slimy, and in the centre of it was a 
murky pool. This open space was encircled by tall pines almost 
bare from age and miasmic air. Grayskin was displeased with the 
place and would have left it at once had he not caught sight of 
some bright green calla leaves which grew near the pool. 

As he bent his head toward the calla stalks, he happened to 
disturb a big black snake, which lay sleeping under them. Grayskin 
had heard Karr speak of the poisonous adders that were to be 
found in the forest. So, when the snake raised its head, shot out its 
tongue and hissed at him, he thought he had encountered an 
awfully dangerous reptile. He was terrified and, raising his foot, he 
struck so hard with his hoof that he crushed the snake's head. 
Then, away he ran in hot haste! 

As soon as Grayskin had gone, another snake, just as long and 
as black as the first, came up from the pool. It crawled over to the 
dead one, and licked the poor, crushed-in head. 

"Can it be true that you are dead, old Harmless?" hissed the 
snake. "We two have lived together so many years; we two have 
been so happy with each other, and have fared so well here in the 
swamp, that we have lived to be older than all the other water- 
snakes in the forest! This is the worst sorrow that could have 
befallen me!" 

The snake was so broken-hearted that his long body writhed 
as if it had been wounded. Lven the frogs, who lived in constant 
fear of him, were sorry for him. 

"What a wicked creature he must be to murder a poor water- 
snake that cannot defend itself!" hissed the snake. "He certainly 
deserves a severe punishment. As sure as my name is Helpless 
and I'm the oldest water-snake in the whole forest, I'll be avenged! 
I shall not rest until that elk lies as dead on the ground as my poor 
old snake -wife." 

When the snake had made this vow he curled up into a hoop 
and began to ponder. One can hardly imagine anything that would 
be more difficult for a poor water-snake than to wreak vengeance 



upon a big, strong elk; and old Helpless pondered day and night 
widiout finding an}' solution. 

One night, as he lay diere widi his vengeance-tiioughts, he 
heard a slight rusde over his head. He glanced up and saw a few 
light nun modis playing in among die trees. 

He followed diem widi his eyes a long while; then began to 
hiss loudly to himself, apparendy pleased widi the diought diat 
had occurred to him— then he fell asleep. 

The next morning die water-snake went over to see Crawlie, 
die adder, who lived in a stony and hilly part of Liberty Forest. He 
told him all about die deadi of die old water-snake, and begged 
diat he who could deal such deadly dirusts would undertake die 
work of vengeance. But Crawlie was not exacdy disposed to go to 
war widi elk. 

"If I were to attack an elk," said die adder, "he would instandy 
kill me. Old Harmless is dead and gone, and we can't bring her 
back to life, so why should I rush into danger on her account?" 

When die water-snake got this reply he raised his head a 
whole foot from die ground, and hissed furiously: 

"Vish vash! Vish vash!" he said. "It's a pity that you, who have 
been blessed with such weapons of defence, should be so 
cowardly diat you don't dare use diem!" 

When die adder heard diis, he too, got angry. 

"Crawl away, old Helpless!" he hissed. "The poison is in my 
fangs, but I would radier spare one who is said to be my kinsman." 

But die water-snake did not move from die spot, and for a 
long time die snakes lay there hissing abusive epidiets at each 
odier. 

When Crawlie was so angry diat he couldn't hiss, but could 
only dart his tongue out, die water-snake changed die subject, and 
began to talk in a very different tone. 

"I had still anotiier errand, Crawlie," he said, lowering his 
voice to a mild whisper. "But now I suppose you are so angry diat 
you wouldn't care to help me?" 

"If you don't ask anything foolish of me, I shall certainly be at 
your service." 

"In die pine trees down by die swamp live a modi folk diat fly 
around all night." 

"I know all about diem," remarked Crawlie. "What's up widi 
them now?" 

"They are die smallest insect family in die forest," said 
Helpless, "and die most harmless, since the caterpillars content 
diemselves with gnawing only pine needles." 

"Yes, I know," said Crawlie. 

"I'm afraid diose modis will soon be exterminated," sighed die 
water-snake. "There are so many who pick off die caterpillars in 
die spring." 



Now Crawlie began to understand that the water-snake wanted 
the caterpillars lor his own purpose, and he answered pleasandy: 

"Do you wish me to say to die owls diat diey are to leave those 
pine tree worms in peace?" 

"Yes, it would be well if you who have some audiority in die 
forest should do diis," said Helpless. 

"I might also drop a good word for die pine needle pickers 
among die thrushes?" volunteered die adder. "I will gladly serve 
you when you do not demand anydiing unreasonable." 

"Now you have given me a good promise, Crawlie," said 
Helpless, "and I'm glad diat I came to you." 



THE NUN MOTHS 

One morning— several years later— Karr lay asleep on die 
porch. It was in die early summer, die season of light nights, and it 
was as bright as day, aldiough die sun was not yet up. Karr was 
awakened by some one calling his name. 

"Is it you, Grayskin?" he asked, for he was accustomed to die 
elk's nighdy visits. Again he heard die call; dien he recognized 
Grayskin' s voice, and hastened in die direction of die sound. 

Karr heard die elk's footfalls in die distance, as he dashed into 
die diickest pine wood, and straight through die brush, following 
no trodden padi. Karr could not catch up widi him, and he had 
great difficulty in even following die trail. "Karr, Karr!" came die 
cry, and die voice was certainly Grayskin's, aldiough it had a ring 
now which die dog had never heard before. 

"I'm coming, I'm coming!" the dog responded. "Where are 
you?" 

"Karr, Karr! Don't you see how it falls and falls?" said 
Grayskin. 

Then Karr noticed diat die pine needles kept dropping and 
dropping from die trees, like a steady fall of rain. 

"Yes, I see how it falls," he cried, and ran far into die forest in 
search of die elk. 

Grayskin kept running through die diickets, while Karr was 
about to lose die trail again. 

"Karr, Karr!" roared Grayskin; "can't you scent diat peculiar 
odour in die forest?" 

Karr stopped and sniffed. 

He had not diought of it before, but now he remarked diat die 
pines sent fordi a much stronger odour dian usual. 

"Yes, I catch die scent," he said. He did not stop long enough 
to find out die cause of it, but hurried on after Grayskin. 

The elk ran ahead widi such speed diat die dog could not 
catch up to him. 



"Karr, Karr!" he called; "can't you hear the crunching on the 
pines?" Now his tone was so plaintive it would have melted a 
stone. 

Karr paused to listen. He heard a faint hut distinct "tap, tap," 
on the trees. It sounded like the ticking of a watch. 

"Yes, I hear how it ticks," cried Karr, and ran no farther. He 
understood that the elk did not want him to follow, hut to take 
notice of something that was happening in the forest. 

Karr was standing heneath the drooping branches of a great 
pine. He looked carefully at it; the needles moved. He went closer 
and saw a mass of grayish-white caterpillars creeping along the 
branches, gnawing off the needles. Every branch was covered with 
them. The crunch, crunch in the trees came from the working of 
their busy little jaws. Gnawed-off needles fell to the ground in a 
continuous shower, and from the poor pines there came such a 
strong odour that the dog suffered from it. 

"What can be the meaning of this?" wondered Karr. "It's too 
bad about the pretty trees! Soon they'll have no beauty left." 

He walked from tree to tree, trying with his poor eyesight to 
see if all was well with them. 

"There's a pine they haven't touched," he thought. But they 
had taken possession of it, too. "And here's a birch— no, this also! 
The game -keeper will not be pleased with this," observed Karr. 

He ran deeper into the thickets, to learn how far the 
destruction had spread. Wherever he went, he heard the same 
ticking; scented the same odour; saw the same needle rain. There 
was no need of his pausing to investigate. He understood it all by 
these signs. The little caterpillars were everywhere. The whole 
forest was being ravaged by them! 

All of a sudden he came to a tract where there was no odour, 
and where all was still. 

"Here's the end of their domain," thought tire dog, as he 
paused and glanced about. 

But here it was even worse; for tire caterpillars had already 
done their work, and the trees were needle -less. They were like 
the dead. The only tiring that covered them was a network of 
ragged threads, which tire caterpillars had spun to use as roads and 
bridges. 

In there, among tire dying trees, Grayskin stood waiting for 
Karr. 

He was not alone. With him were four old elk— tire nrost 
respected in tire forest. Karr knew them: They were Crooked- 
Back, who was a snrall elk, but had a larger hump than tire others; 
Antler-Crown, who was tire nrost dignified of tire elk; Rough- 
Mane, with tire thick coat; and an old long-legged one, who, up till 
tire autumn before, when he got a bullet in his thigh, had been 
terribly hot-tempered and quarrelsome. 



"What in the world is happening to the forest?" Karr asked 
when he came up to the elk. They stood with lowered heads, far 
protruding upper lips, and looked puzzled. 

"No one can tell," answered Grayskin. "This insect family 
used to he die least hurtful of any in the forest, and never hefore 
have they done any damage. But these last few years they have 
heen multiplying so fast that now it appears as if the entire forest 
would he destroyed." 

"Yes, it looks had," Karr agreed, "hut I see that the wisest 
animals in the forest have come together to hold a consultation. 
Perhaps you have already found some remedy?" 

When the dog said this, Crooked-Back solemnly raised his 
heavy head, pricked up his long ears, and spoke: "We have 
summoned you hither, Karr, that we may learn if the humans 
know of this desolation." 

"No," said Karr, "no human heing ever comes thus far into the 
forest when it's not hunting time. They know nothing of this 
misfortune." 

Then Antler-Crown said: 

"We who have lived long in the forest do not think that we can 
light this insect pest all hy ourselves." 

"After this there will he no peace in the forest!" put in Rough- 
Mane. 

"But we can't let the whole Liherty Forest go to rack and 
ruin!" protested Big-and-Strong. "We'll have to consult the 
humans; there is no alternative." 

Karr understood that the elk had difficulty in expressing what 
they wished to say, and he tried to help them. 

"Perhaps you want me to let the people know the conditions 
here?" he suggested. 

All the old elk nodded their heads. 

"It's most unfortunate that we are ohliged to ask help of 
human beings, but we have no choice." 

A moment later Karr was on his way home. As he ran ahead, 
deeply distressed over all that he had heard and seen, a big black 
water-snake approached him. 

"Well met in the forest!" hissed the water-snake. 

"Well met again!" snarled Karr, and rushed by without 
stopping. 

The snake turned and tried to catch up to him. 

"Perhaps that creature also is worried about the forest," 
thought Karr, and waited. 

Immediately the snake began to talk about the great disaster. 

"There will be an end of peace and quiet in the forest when 
human beings are called hither," said the snake. 

"I'm afraid there will," the dog agreed; "but the oldest forest 
dwellers know what they're about!" he added. 



"I think I know a better plan," said the snake, "if I can get the 
reward I wish." 

"Are you not the one whom ever}' one around here calls old 
Helpless?" said die dog, sneeringly. 

"I'm an old inhabitant of die forest," said die snake, "and I 
know how to get rid of such plagues." 

"If you clear die forest of diat pest, I feel sure you can have 
anything you ask for," said Karr. 

The snake did not respond to this until he had crawled under 
a tree stump, where he was well protected. Then he said: 

"Tell Grayskin diat if he will leave Liberty Forest forever, and 
go far nordi, where no oak tree grows, I will send sickness and 
deadi to all die creeping tilings that gnaw the pines and spruces!" 

"What's diat you say?" asked Karr, brisding up. "What harm 
has Grayskin ever done you?" 

"He has slain the one whom I loved best," the snake declared, 
"and I want to be avenged." 

Before die snake had finished speaking, Karr made a dash for 
him; but die reptile lay safely hidden under die tree stump. 

"Stay where you are!" Karr concluded. "We'll manage to drive 
out die caterpillars widiout your help." 



THE BIG WAR OF THE MOTHS 

The following spring, as Karr was dashing dirough die forest 
one morning, he heard some one behind him calling: "Karr! 
Karr!" 

He turned and saw an old fox standing outside his lair. 

"You must tell me if die humans are doing anydiing for die 
forest," said die fox. 

"Yes, you may be sure diey are!" said Karr. "They are working 
as hard as diey can." 

"They have killed off all my kinsfolk, and diey'll be killing me 
next," protested die fox. "But diey shall be pardoned for that if 
only they save the forest." 

That year Karr never ran into the woods widiout some 
animal's asking if the humans could save die forest. It was not easy 
for die dog to answer; die people diemselves were not certain that 
they could conquer die modis. But considering how feared and 
hated old Kolmarden had always been, it was remarkable diat 
every day more dian a hundred men went tiiere, to work. They 
cleared away die underbrush. They felled dead trees, lopped off 
branches from die live ones so diat die caterpillars could not easily 
crawl from tree to tree; they also dug wide trenches around die 
ravaged parts and put up lime -washed fences to keep diem out of 
new territory. Then diey painted rings of lime around die trunks 



of trees to prevent the caterpillars leaving those they had already 
stripped. The idea was to force diem to remain where diey were 
until diey starved to deadi. 

The people worked with the forest until far into the spring. 
They were hopeful, and could hardly wait for the caterpillars to 
come out from their eggs, feeling certain that they had shut them 
in so effectually that most of them would die of starvation. 

But in die early summer die caterpillars came out, more 
numerous than ever. 

They were everywhere! They crawled on die country roads, on 
fences, on die walls of die cabins. They wandered outside the 
confines of Liberty Forest to other parts of Kolmarden. 

"They won't stop till all our forests are destroyed!" sighed the 
people, who were in great despair, and could not enter the forest 
without weeping. 

Karr was so sick of die sight of all these creeping, gnawing 
tilings that he could hardly bear to step outside die door. But one 
day he felt that he must go and find out how Grayskin was getting 
on. He took die shortest cut to the elk's haunts, and hurried 
along— his nose close to die earth. When he came to die tree 
stump where he had met Helpless die year before die snake was 
still there, and called to him: 

"Have you told Grayskin what I said to you when last we 
met?" asked die water-snake. 

Karr only growled and tried to get at him. 

"If you haven't told him, by all means do so!" insisted-tlie 
snake. "You must see that die humans know of no cure for this 
plague." 

"Neither do you!" retorted the dog, and ran on. Karr found 
Grayskin, but die elk was so low-spirited that he scarcely greeted 
die dog. He began at once to talk of die forest. 

"I don't know what I wouldn't give if this misery were only at 
an end!" he said. 

"Now I shall tell you that 'tis said you could save die forest." 
Then Karr delivered die water-snake's message. 

"If anyone but Helpless had promised diis, I should 
immediately go into exile," declared die elk. "But how can a poor 
water-snake have die power to work such a miracle?" 

"Of course it's only a bluff," said Karr. "Water-snakes always 
like to pretend that diey know more dian odier creatures." 

When Karr was ready to go home, Grayskin accompanied 
him part of the way. Presendy Karr heard a thrush, perched on a 
pine top, cry: 

"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed die forest! There 
goes Grayskin, who has destroyed die forest!" Karr diought that he 
had not heard correcdy, but die next moment a hare came darting 
across die padi. When the hare saw diem, he stopped, flapped his 



ears, and screamed: 

"Here comes Grayskin, who has destroyed die forest!" Then 
he ran as fast as he could. 

"What do they mean hy diat?" asked Karr. 

"I really don't know," said Grayskin. "I diink that the small 
forest animals are displeased with me because I was die one who 
proposed diat we should ask help of human beings. When die 
underbrush was cut down, all dieir lairs and hiding places were 
destroyed." 

They walked on togedier a while longer, and Karr heard die 
same cry coming from all directions: 

"There goes Grayskin, who has destroyed the forest!" 
Grayskin pretended not to hear it; but Karr understood why die 
elk was so downhearted. 

"I say, Grayskin, what does die water-snake mean by saying 
you killed die one he loved best?" 

"How can I tell?" said Grayskin. "You know very well that I 
never kill anything." 

Shortly after that they met the four old elk— Crooked-Back, 
Antler-Crown, Rough-Mane, and Big-and-Strong, who were 
coming along slowly, one after die other. 

"Well met in die forest!" called Grayskin. 

"Well met in turn!" answered die elk. 

"We were just looking for you, Grayskin, to consult with you 
about die forest." 

"The fact is," began Crooked-Back, "we have been informed 
diat a crime has been committed here, and diat die whole forest is 
being destroyed because die criminal has not been punished." 

"What kind of a crime was it?" 

"Some one killed a harmless creature diat he couldn't eat. 
Such an act is accounted a crime in Liberty Forest." 

"Who could have done such a cowardly tiling?" wondered 
Grayskin. 

"They say diat an elk did it, and we were just going to ask if 
you knew who it was." 

"No," said Grayskin, "I have never heard of an elk killing a 
harmless creature." 

Grayskin parted from die four old elk, and went on widi Karr. 
He was silent and walked widi lowered head. They happened to 
pass Crawlie, the adder, who lay on his shelf of rock. 

"Theregoes Grayskin, who has destroyed die whole forest!" 
hissed Crawlie, like all die rest. 

By diat time Grayskin' s patience was exhausted. He walked up 
to die snake, and raised a forefoot. 

"Do you diink of crushing me as you crushed die old water- 
snake?" hissed Crawlie. 

"Did I kill a water-snake?" asked Grayskin, astonished. 



"The first day you were in the forest you killed the wife of 
poor old Helpless," said Crawlie. 

Grayskin turned quickly from die adder, and continued his 
walk with Karr. Suddenly he stopped. 

"Karr, it was I who committed that crime! I killed, a harmless 
creature; therefore it is on my account that the forest is heing 
destroyed." 

"What are you saying?" Karr interrupted. 

"You may tell the water-snake, Helpless, that Grayskin goes 
into exile to-night!" 

"That I shall never tell him!" protested Karr. "The Far North 
is a dangerous country for elk." 

"Do you think that I wish to remain here, when I have caused 
a disaster like this?" protested Grayskin. 

"Don't he rash! Sleep over it hefore you do anything!" 

"It was you who taught me that the elk are one with the forest," 
said Grayskin, and so saying he parted from Karr. 

The dog went home alone; hut this talk with Grayskin 
trouhled him, and the next morning he returned to the forest to 
seek him, hut Grayskin was not to he found, and the dog did not 
search long for him. He realized that the elk had taken the snake 
at his word, and had gone into exile. 

On his walk home Karr was too unhappy for words! He could 
not understand why Grayskin should allow that wretch of a water- 
snake to trick him away. He had never heard of such folly! "What 
power can that old Helpless have?" 

As Karr walked along, his mind full of these thoughts, he 
happened to see the game -keeper, who stood pointing up at a tree. 

"What are you looking at?" asked a man who stood heside 
him. 

"Sickness has come among the caterpillars," ohserved the 
game-keeper. 

Karr was astonished, hut he was even more angered at the 
snake's having the power to keep his word. Grayskin would have 
to stay away a long, long time, for, of course, that water-snake 
would never die. 

At the very height of his grief a thought came to Karr which 
comforted him a little. 

"Perhaps the water-snake won't live so long, after all!" he 
thought. "Surely he cannot always lie protected under a tree root. 
As soon as he has cleaned out the caterpillars, I know some one 
who is going to bite his head off!" 

It was true that an illness had made its appearance among the 
caterpillars. The first summer it did not spread much. It had only 
just broken out when it was time for the larvae to turn into pupae. 
From the latter came millions of moths. They flew around in the 
trees like a blinding snowstorm, and laid countless numbers of 



eggs. An even greater destruction was prophesied for the following 
year. 

The destruction came not only to the forest, hut also to the 
caterpillars. The sickness spread quickly from forest to forest. The 
sick caterpillars stopped eating, crawled up to the branches of the 
trees, and died there. 

There was great rejoicing among the people when they saw 
them die, but there was even greater rejoicing among tire forest 
animals. 

From day to day tire dog Karr-went about with savage glee, 
drinking of tire hour when he might venture to kill Helpless. 

But tire caterpillars, meanwhile, had spread over nriles of pine 
woods. Not in one summer did tire disease reach them all. Many 
lived to beconre pupae and moths. 

Grayskin sent nressages to his friend Karr by tire birds of 
passage, to say that he was alive and faring well. But tire birds told 
Karr confidentially that on several occasions Grayskin had been 
pursued by poachers, and that only with tire greatest difficulty had 
he escaped. 

Karr lived in a state of continual grief, yearning, and anxiety. 
Yet he had to wait two whole sunrnrers nrore before there was an 
end of tire caterpillars! 

Karr no sooner heard tire ganre -keeper say that tire forest was 
out of danger than he started on a hunt for Helpless. But when he 
was in tire thick of tire forest he nrade a frightful discovery: He 
could not hunt airy nrore, he could not run, he could not track his 
enemy, and he could not see at all! 

During tire long years of waiting, old age had overtaken Karr. 
He had grown old without having noticed it. He had not tire 
strength even to kill a water-snake: He was not able to save his 
friend Grayskin fronr his enemy. 



RETRIBUTION 

One afternoon Akka fronr Kebnekaise and her flock alighted 
on the shore of a forest lake. 

Spring was backward— as it always is in the mountain districts. 
Ice covered all tire lake save a narrow strip next tire laird. The 
geese at once plunged into the water to bathe and hunt for food. 
In tire nrorning Nils Holgersson had dropped one of his wooden 
shoes, so he went down by the elnrs and birches that grew along 
tire shore, to look for something to bind around his foot. 

The boy walked quite a distance before he found anything that 
he could use. He glanced about nervously, for he did not fancy 
being in tire forest. 

"Give nre tire plains and tire lakes!" he drought. "There you 



can see what you are likely to meet. Now, if this were a grove of 
little birches, it would be well enough, for then tire ground would 
be almost bare; but how people can like these wild, pathless 
forests is incomprehensible to me. If I owned this land I would 
chop down every tree." 

At last he caught sight of a piece of birch bark, and just as he 
was fitting it to his foot he heard a rustle behind him. He turned 
quickly. A snake darted from the brush straight toward him! 

The snake was uncommonly long and thick, but die boy soon 
saw that it had a white spot on each cheek. 

"Why, it's only a water-snake," he laughed; "it can't harm me." 

But the next instant the snake gave him a powerful blow on 
the chest that knocked him down. The boy was on his feet in a 
second and running away, but tire snake was after him! The 
ground was stony and scrubby; the boy could not proceed very 
fast; and the snake was close at his heels. 

Then the boy saw a big rock in front of him, and began to 
scale it. 

"I do hope the snake can't follow me here!" he thought, but he 
had no sooner reached the top of the rock than he saw that the 
snake was following him. 

Quite close to the boy, on a narrow ledge at tire top of the 
rock, lay a round stone as large as a man's head. As the snake 
came closer, tire boy ran behind tire stone, and gave it a push. It 
rolled right down on the snake, drawing it along to tire ground, 
where it landed on its head. 

"That stone did its work well!" thought tire boy with a sigh of 
relief, as he saw tire snake squirm a little, and then lie perfectly 
still. 

"I don't think I've been in greater peril on tire whole journey," 
he said. 

He had hardly recovered from tire shock when he heard a 
rustle above him, and saw a bird circling through the air to light on 
the ground right beside the snake. The bird was like a crow in size 
and form, but was dressed in a pretty coat of shiny black feathers. 

The boy cautiously retreated into a crevice of the rock. His 
adventure in being kidnapped by crows was still fresh in his 
memory, and he did not care to show himself when there was no 
need of it. 

The bird strode back and forth beside the snake's body, and 
turned it over with his beak. Finally he spread his wings and began 
to shriek in ear-splitting tones: 

"It is certainly Helpless, the water-snake, that lies dead here!" 
Once more he walked the length of tire snake; then he stood in a 
deep study, and scratched his neck with his foot. 

"It isn't possible that there, can be two such big snakes in the 
forest," he pondered. "It must surely be Helpless!" 



He was just going to thrust his beak into the snake, but 
suddenly checked himself. 

"You mustn't be a numskull, Bataki!" he remarked to himself. 
"Surely you cannot be diinking of eating die snake until you have 
called Karr! He wouldn't believe diat Helpless was dead unless he 
could see it widi his own eyes." 

The boy tried to keep quiet, but die bird was so ludicrously 
solemn, as he stalked back and fordi chattering to himself, diat he 
had to laugh. 

The bird heard him, and, widi a flap of his wings, he was up 
on die rock. The boy rose quickly and walked toward him. 

"Are you not the one who is called Bataki, die raven? and are 
you not a friend of Akka from Kebnekaise?" asked die boy. 

The bird regarded him intently; then nodded three times. 
"Surely, you're not die little chap who flies around widi die wild 
geese, and whom they call Thumbietot?" 

"Oh, you're not so far out of the way," said die boy. 

"What luck diat I should have run across you! Perhaps you 
can tell me who killed diis water-snake?" 

"The stone which I rolled down on him killed him," replied 
die boy, and related how the whole tiling happened. 

"That was cleverly done for one who is as tiny as you are!" said 
die raven. "I have a friend in these parts who will be glad to know 
that this snake has been killed, and I should like to render you a 
sendee in return." 

"Then tell me why you are glad the water-snake is dead," 
responded the boy. 

"It's a long story," said the raven; "you wouldn't have the 
patience to listen to it." 

But the boy insisted that he had, and then the raven told him 
die whole story about Karr and Grayskin and Helpless, the water- 
snake. When he had finished, the boy sat quietly for a moment, 
looking straight ahead. Then he spoke: 

"I seem to like die forest better since hearing this. I wonder if 
there is anything left of the old Liberty Forest." 

"Most of it has been destroyed," said Bataki. "The trees look 
as if they had passed through a fire. They'll have to be cleared 
away, and it will take many years before die forest will be what it 
once was." 

"That snake deserved his death!" declared die boy. "But I 
wonder if it could be possible diat he was so wise he could send 
sickness to die caterpillars?" 

"Perhaps he knew diat diey frequently became sick in that 
way," intimated Bataki. 

"Yes, diat may be; but all die same, I must say that he was a 
very wily snake." 

The boy stopped talking because he saw die raven was not 



listening to him, but sitting with gaze averted. "Hark!" he said. 
"Karr is in the vicinity. Won't he be happy when he sees drat 
Helpless is dead!" 

The boy turned his head in dre direction of tire sound. 

"He's talking with tire wild geese," he said. 

"Oh, you may be sure that he has dragged himself down to tire 
strand to get tire latest news-about Grayskin!" 

Both tire boy and tire raven junrped to tire ground, and 
hastened down to the shore. All tire geese had conre out of tire 
lake, and stood talking with an old dog, who was so weak and 
decrepit that it seenred as if he might drop dead at any moment. 

"There's Karr," said Bataki to tire boy. "Let hinr hear first 
what tire wild geese have to say to him; later we shall tell hinr that 
tire water-snake is dead." 

Presently they heard Akka talking to Karr. 

"It happened last year while we were making our usual spring 
trip," remarked tire leader-goose. '"We started out one morning— 
Yksi, Kaksi, and I, and we flew over the great boundary forests 
between Dalecarlia and Halsingland. Under us we saw only thick 
pine forests. The snow was still deep, among the trees, and tire 
creeks were mostly frozen. 

"Suddenly we noticed three poachers down in tire forest! They 
were on skis, had dogs in leash, carried knives in their belts, but 
had no guns. 

"As there was a hard crust on the snow, they did not bother to 
take tire winding forest paths, but skied straight ahead. Apparently 
tirey kirew r very well where they nrust go to find what they w r ere 
seeking. 

"We wild geese flew on, high up in tire air, so that tire whole 
forest under us was visible. When w r e sighted tire poachers w r e 
wanted to find out wirere the game was, so we circled up and 
down, peering through tire trees. Then, in a dense thicket, we saw 
something that looked like big, nross-covered rocks, but couldn't 
be rocks, for there was no snow on them. 

"We shot down, suddenly, and lit in tire centre of tire thicket. 
The three rocks moved. They were three elk— a bull and two 
cows— resting in tire bleak forest. 

"When we alighted, tire elk bull rose and came toward us. He 
was the nrost superb animal we had ever seen. When he saw that 
it was only sonre poor wild geese that had awakened hinr, he lay 
down again. 

"'No, old granddaddy, you mustn't go back to sleep!' I cried. 
'Flee as fast as you can! There are poachers in the forest, and tirey 
are bound for this very deer fold.' 

"'Thank you, goose mother!' said tire elk. He seenred to be 
dropping to sleep wirile he was speaking. 'But surely you nrust 
know tirat we elk are under tire protection of tire law at this time of 



die year. Those poachers are probably out for fox,' he yawned. 

"'There are plenty of fox trails in die forest, but die poachers 
are not looking for diem. Believe me, old granddaddy! They know 
diat you are lying here, and are coming to attack you. They have 
no guns widi diem— only spears and knives— for diey dare not fire a 
shot at this season.' 

"The elk bull lay diere calmly, but die elk cows felt uneasy. 

"'It may be as die geese say,' diey remarked, beginning to 
bestir diemselves. 

'"You just lie down!' said die elk bull. 'There are no poachers 
coming here; of diat you may be certain.' 

"There was nothing more to be done, so we wild geese rose 
again into die air. But we continued to circle over die place, to see 
how it would turn out for die elk. 

"We had hardly reached our regular dying altitude, when we 
saw the elk bull come out from die diicket. He sniffed die air a 
littie, dien walked straight toward die poachers. As he strode along 
he stepped upon dry twigs diat crackled noisily. A big barren 
marsh lay just beyond him. Thither he went and took his stand in 
the middle, where diere was nodiing to hide him from view. 

"There he stood until die poachers emerged from die woods. 
Then he turned and lied in die opposite direction. The poachers 
let loose die dogs, and diey diemselves skied after him at full 
speed. 

"The elk threw back his head and loped as fast as he could. 
He kicked up snow until it dew like a blizzard about him. Bodi 
dogs and men were left far behind. Then die elk stopped, as if to 
await dieir approach. When diey were within sight he dashed 
ahead again. We understood diat he was purposely tempting the 
hunters away from die place where die cows were. We diought it 
brave of him to face danger himself, in order diat those who were 
dear to him might be left in safety. None of us wanted to leave die 
place until we had seen how all diis was to end. 

"Thus die chase continued for two hours or more. We 
wondered diat die poachers went to die trouble of pursuing die 
elk when diey were not armed with rides. They couldn't have 
diought diat diey could succeed in tiring out a runner like him! 

"Then we noticed diat the elk no longer ran so rapidly. He 
stepped on die snow more carefully, and every time he lifted his 
feet, blood could be seen in his tracks. 

"We understood why the poachers had been so persistent! 
They had counted on help from the snow. The elk was heavy, and 
with every step he sank to die bottom of die drift. The hard crust 
on the snow was scraping his legs. It scraped away die fur, and tore 
out pieces of flesh, so diat he was in torture every time he put his 
foot down. 

"The poachers and die dogs, who were so light diat die ice 



crust could hold dieir weight, pursued him all die while. He ran 
on and on— his steps hecoming more and more uncertain and 
faltering. He gasped for hreath. Not only did he suffer intense 
pain, hut he was also exhausted from wading through die deep 
snowdrifts. 

"At last he lost all patience. He paused to let poachers and 
dogs come upon him, and was read)' to fight them. As he stood 
there waiting, he glanced upward. When he saw us wild geese 
circling ahove him, he cried out: 

'"Stay here, wild geese, until all is over! And the next time you 
fly over Kolmarden, look up Karr, and ask him if he doesn't diink 
that his friend Grayskin has met with a happy end?'" 

When Akka had gone so far in her story die old dog rose and 
walked nearer to her. 

"Grayskin led a good life," he said. "He understands me. He 
knows that I'm a hrave dog, and that I shall he glad to hear that he 
had a happy end. Now tell me how—" 

He raised his tail and threw hack his head, as if to give himself 
a hold and proud hearing— then he collapsed. 

"Karr! Karr!" called a man's voice from die forest. 

The old dog rose obediently. 

"My master is calling me," he said, "and I must not tarry 
longer. I just saw him load his gun. Now we two are going into die 
forest for die last time. 

"Many dianks, wild goose! I know everything diat I need know 
to die content!" 



II 

THE WIND WITCH 

IN NARKE 

IN BYGONE days diere was something in Narke die like of 
which was not to be found elsewhere: it was a witch, named 
Ysatter-Kaisa. 

The name Kaisa had been given her because she had a good 
deal to do widi wind and storm— and diese wind witches are always 
so called. The surname was added because she was supposed to 
have come from Ysatter swamp in Asker parish. 

It seemed as diough her real abode must have been at Asker; 
but she used also to appear at odier places. Nowhere in all Narke 
could one be sure of not meeting her. 

She was no dark, mournful witch, but gay and frolicsome; and 
what she loved most of all was a gale of wind. As soon as diere was 
wind enough, off she w r ould fly to die Narke plain for a good 



dance. On days when a whirlwind swept die plain, Ysatter-Kaisa 
had fun! She would stand right in die whirl and spin round, her 
long hair flying up among die clouds and die long trail of her robe 
sweeping die ground, like a dust cloud, while die whole plain lay 
spread out under her, like a ball room floor. 

Of a morning Ysatter-Kaisa would sit up in some tall pine at 
die top of a precipice, and look across die plain. If it happened to 
be winter and she saw many teams on the roads she hurriedly blew 
up a blizzard, piling die drifts so high diat people could barely get 
back to dieir homes by evening. If it chanced to he summer and 
good harvest weadier, Ysatter-Kaisa would sit quiedy until die first 
hayricks had been loaded, dien down she would come with a 
couple of heavy showers, which put an end to the work for that 
day. 

It was only too true diat she seldom diought of anything else 
dian raising mischief. The charcoal burners up in die Kil 
mountains hardly dared take a cat-nap, for as soon as she saw an 
unwatched kiln, she stole up and blew on it until it began to burn 
in a great flame. If die metal drivers from Laxa and Svarta were 
out late of an evening, Ysatter-Kaisa would veil die roads and die 
country round about in such dark clouds diat bodi men and 
horses lost dieir way and drove die heavy trucks down into 
swamps and morasses. 

If, on a summer's day, die dean's wife at Glanshammar had 
spread die tea tahle in die garden and along would come a gust of 
wind diat lifted die clotii from die table and turned over cups and 
saucers, diey knew who had raised the mischief! If die mayor of 
Orehro's hat hlew off, so that he had to run across die whole 
square after it; if die wash on die line hlew away and got covered 
with dirt, or if die smoke poured into die cabins and seemed 
unable to find its way out dirough die chimney, it was easy enough 
to guess who was out making merry! 

Aldiough Ysatter-Kaisa was fond of all sorts of tantalizing 
games, diere was nodiing really had about her. One could see diat 
she was hardest on diose who were quarrelsome, sting}', or 
wicked; while honest folk and poor littie children she would take 
under her wing. Old people say of her diat, once, when Asker 
church was burning, Ysatter-Kaisa sw r ept dirough the air, lit amid 
fire and smoke on die church roof, and averted die disaster. 

All die same die Narke folk were often radier tired of Ysatter- 
Kaisa, hut she never tired of playing her tricks on diem. As she sat 
on die edge of a cloud and looked down upon Narke, which 
rested so peacefully and comfortably beneadi her, she must have 
diought: "The inhabitants would fare much too well if I w r ere not 
in existence. They would grow sleepy and dull. There must he 
some one like myself to rouse diem and keep diem in good 
spirits." 



Then she would laugh wildly and, chattering like a magpie, 
would rush off, dancing and spinning from one end of die plain to 
the other. When a Narke man saw her come dragging her dust 
trail over the plain, he could not help smiling. Provoking and 
tiresome she certainly was, hut she had a merry spirit. It was just as 
refreshing for the peasants to meet Ysatter-Kaisa as it was for the 
plain to he lashed hy the windstorm. 

Nowadays 'tis said that Ysatter-Kaisa is dead and gone, like all 
odier witches, hut this one can hardly helieve. It is as if some one 
were to come and tell you that henceforth the air would always he 
still on the plain, and the wind w r ould never more dance across it 
with blustering breezes and drenching showers. 

He who fancies that Ysatter-Kaisa is dead and gone may as 
well hear what occurred in Narke the year that Nils Holgersson 
traveled over that part of the country. Then let him tell wiiat he 
thinks about it. 



MARKET EVE 

Wednesday, April twenty-sevendi 

It was die day before die big Cattle Fair at Orebro; it rained in 
torrents and people diought: "This is exactly as in Ysatter-Kaisa' s 
time! At fairs she used to be more prankish dian usual. It was 
quite in her line to arrange a downpour like dris on a market eve." 

As die day wore on, die rain increased, and toward evening 
came regular cloud-bursts. The roads were like bottomless 
swamps. The farmers who had started from home widi dieir cattle 
early in die morning, that they might arrive at a seasonable hour, 
fared badly. Cows and oxen were so tired diey could hardly move, 
and many of die poor beasts dropped down in die middle of die 
road, to show diat diey were too exhausted to go any fardier. All 
who lived along die roadside had to open dieir doors to the 
market-bound travelers, and harbour diem as best diey could. 
Farm houses, bams, and sheds were soon crowded to dieir limit. 

Meanwhile, diose who could struggle along toward die inn did 
so; but when diey arrived diey wished diey had stopped at some 
cabin along die road. All die cribs in die barn and all die stalls in 
die stable were already occupied. There was no other choice dian 
to let horses and cattie stand out in die rain. Their masters could 
barely manage to get under cover. 

The crush and mud and slush in die barn yard were frightful! 
Some of die animals were standing in puddles and could not even 
lie down. There were thoughtful masters, of course, who procured 
straw for dieir animals to lie on, and spread blankets over diem; 
but diere were diose, also, who sat in the inn, drinking and 



gambling, entirely forgetful of the dumb creatures which they 
should have protected. 

The boy and die wild geese had come to a little wooded island 
in Hjalmar Lake diat evening. The island was separated from die 
main land by a narrow and shallow stream, and at low tide one 
could pass over it dry-shod. 

It rained just as hard on die island as it did everywhere else. 
The boy could not sleep for die water that kept dripping down on 
him. Finally he got up and began to walk. He fancied that he felt 
the rain less when he moved about. 

He had hardly circled the island, when he heard a splashing in 
the stream. Presently he saw a solitary horse tramping among die 
trees. Never in all his life had he seen such a wreck of a horse! He 
was broken-winded and stiff-kneed and so thin diat every rib could 
be seen under die hide. He bore neidier harness nor saddle— only 
an old bridle, from which dangled a half-rotted rope-end. 
Obviously he had had no difficulty in breaking loose. 

The horse walked straight toward die spot where die wild 
geese were sleeping. The boy was afraid that he would step on 
diem. 

"Where are you going? Feel your ground!" shouted die boy. 

"Oh, diere you are!" exclaimed die horse. "Fve walked miles 
to meet you!" 

"Have you heard of me!" asked die boy, astonished. 

"I've got ears, even if I am old! There are many who talk of 
you nowadays." 

As he spoke, die horse bent his head diat he might see better, 
and die boy noticed diat he had a small head, beautiful eyes, and a 
soft, sensitive nose. 

"He must have been a good horse at die start, though he has 
come to grief in his old age," he diought. 

"I wish you would come with me and help me with 
somediing," pleaded the horse. 

The boy thought it would be embarrassing to accompany a 
creature who looked so wretched, and excused himself on account 
of die bad weadier. 

"You'll be no worse off on my back dian you are lying here," 
said die horse. "But perhaps you don't dare to go with an old 
tramp of a horse like me." 

"Certainly I dare!" said die boy. 

"Then wake die geese, so diat we can arrange with diem where 
they shall come for you to-morrow," said die horse. 

The boy was soon seated on the animal's back. The old nag 
trotted along better dian he had diought possible. It was a long 
ride in die rain and darkness before diey halted near a large inn, 
where everything looked terribly uninviting! The wheel tracks were 
so deep in die road diat die boy feared he might drown should he 



fall down into them. Alongside the fence, which enclosed the yard, 
some thirty or forty horses and catde were tied, with no protection 
against the rain, and in the yard were wagons piled with packing 
cases, where sheep, calves, hogs, and chickens were shut in. 

The horse walked over to the fence and stationed himself. 
The boy remained seated upon his back, and, with his good night 
eyes, plainly saw how badly tire animals fared. 

"How do you happen to be standing out here in the rain?" he 
asked. 

"We're on our way to a fair at Orebro, but we were obliged to 
put up here on account of the rain. This is an inn; but so many 
travelers have already arrived that there's no roonr for us in the 
barns." 

The boy nrade no reply, but sat quietly looking about him. 
Not many of the animals were asleep, and on all sides he heard 
complaints and indignant protests. They had reason enough for 
grumbling, for tire weather was even worse than it had been earlier 
in tire day. A freezing wind had begun to blow, and tire rain which 
came beating down on them was turning to snow. It was easy 
enough to understand what tire horse wanted tire boy to help him 
with. 

"Do you see that fine farm yard directly opposite tire inn?" 
remarked tire horse. 

"Yes, I see it," answered tire boy, "and I can't comprehend 
why they haven't tried to find shelter for all of you in there. They 
are already full, perhaps?" 

"No, there are no strangers in that place," said tire horse. "The 
people who live on that farm are so stingy and selfish that it would 
be useless for any one to ask them for harbour." 

"If that's tire case, I suppose you'll have to stand where you 
are. 

"I was bom and raised on that farm," said tire horse; "I know 
that there is a large barn and a big cow shed, with many empty 
stalls and mangers, and I was wondering if you couldn't manage in 
sonre way or other to get us in over there." 

"I don't think I could venture" hesitated tire boy. But he felt so 
sorry for tire poor beasts that he wanted at least to try. 

He ran into the strange barn yard and saw at once that all tire 
outhouses were locked, and the keys gone. He stood there, 
puzzled and helpless, when aid came to him from an unexpected 
source. A gust of wind canre sweeping along with terrific force and 
flung open a shed door right in front of him. 

The boy was not long in getting back to tire horse. 

"It isn't possible to get into tire barn or tire cow house," he 
said, "but there's a big, empty hay shed that they have forgotten to 
bolt. I can lead you into that." 

"Thank you!" said tire horse. "It will seenr good to sleep once 



more on familiar ground. It's die only happiness I can expect in 
diis life." 

Meanwhile, at die dourishing farm opposite die inn, die family 
sat up much later dian usual diat evening. 

The master of die place was a man of thirty-live, tall and 
dignified, widi a handsome hut melancholy face. During die day 
he had heen out in the rain and had got wet, like every one else, 
and at supper he asked his old modier, who was still mistress of 
die place, to light a fire on the heardi diat he might dry his clodies. 
The modier kindled a feehle hlaze— for in diat house diey were 
not wasteful widi wood— and die master hung his coat on die hack 
of a chair, and placed it hefore die lire. Widi one foot on top of 
die andiron and a hand resting on his knee, he stood gazing into 
die emhers. Thus he stood for two whole hours, making no move 
other dian to cast a log on die fire now and tiien. 

The mistress removed die supper tilings and turned down his 
hed for the night hefore she went to her own room and seated 
herself. At intervals she came to the door and looked wonderingly 
at her son. 

"It's nodiing, modier. I'm only thinking," he said. 

His thoughts were on something that had occurred shortly 
hefore: When he passed the inn a horse dealer had asked him if 
he would not like to purchase a horse, and had shown him an old 
nag so weatiier-heaten that he asked the dealer if he took him for a 
fool, since he wished to palm off such a played out heast on him. 

"Oh, no!" said the horse dealer. "I only thought diat, 
inasmuch as the horse once helonged to you, you might wish to 
give him a comfortahle home in his old age; he has need of it." 

Then he looked at die horse and recognized it as one which 
he himself had raised and hroken in; hut it did not occur to him to 
purchase such an old and useless creature on that account. No, 
indeed! He was not one who squandered his money. 

All die same, the sight of the horse had awakened many 
memories— and it was die memories that kept him awake. 

That horse had heen a fine animal. His fatiier had let him 
tend it from die start. He had hroken it in and had loved it above 
everydiing else. His fatiier had complained diat he used to feed it 
too well, and often he had heen ohliged to steal out and smuggle 
oats to it. 

Once, when he ventured to talk widi his fatiier ahout letting 
him huy a hroadcloth suit, or having the cart painted, his fatiier 
stood as if petrified, and he diought the old man w r ould have a 
stroke. He tried to make his fatiier understand diat, when he had 
a fine horse to drive, he should look presentahle himself. 

The fatiier made no reply, hut two days later he took die horse 
to Orehro and sold it. 

It was cruel of him. But it was plain diat his fatiier had feared 



that this horse might lead him into vanity and extravagance. And 
now, so long afterward, he had to admit that his father was right. A 
horse like diat surely would have heen a temptation. At first he 
had grieved terribly over his loss. Many a time he had gone down 
to Orebro, just to stand on a street comer and see die horse pass 
by, or to steal into die stable and give him a lump of sugar. He 
diought: "If I ever get die farm, die first diing I do will be to buy 
back my horse." 

Now his father was gone and he himself had been master for 
two years, but he had not made a move toward buying die horse. 
He had not diought of him for ever so long, until to-night. 

It was strange that he should have forgotten die beast so 
entirely! 

His father had been a very headstrong, domineering man. 
When his son was grown and die two had worked togedier, the 
fadier had gained absolute power over him. The boy had come to 
diink diat everything his fadier did was right, and, after he became 
the master, he only tried to do exactly as his fadier would have 
done. 

He knew, of course, diat folk said his fadier was stingy; but it 
was well to keep a tight hold on one's purse and not dirow away 
money needlessly. The goods one has received should not be 
wasted. It was better to live on a debt-free place and be called 
stingy, dian to carry heavy mortgages, like odier farm owners. 

He had gone so far in his mind when he was called back by a 
strange sound. It was as if a shrill, mocking voice were repeating 
his dioughts: "It's better to keep a firm hold on one's purse and be 
called stingy, dian to be in debt, like odier farm owners." 

It sounded as if some one was trying to make sport of his 
wisdom and he was about to lose his temper, when he realized 
diat it was all a mistake. The wind was beginning to rage, and he 
had been standing there getting so sleepy that he mistook the 
howling of die wind in die chimney for human speech. 

He glanced up at die wall clock, which just dien struck eleven. 

"It's time diat you were in bed," he remarked to himself. Then 
he remembered diat he had not yet gone die rounds of die farm 
yard, as it was his custom to do every night, to make sure diat all 
doors were closed and all lights extinguished. This was somediing 
he had never neglected since he became master. He drew on his 
coat and went out in die storm. 

He found everything as it should be, save diat die door to die 
empty hay shed had been blown open by die wind. He stepped 
inside for die key, locked die shed door and put die key into his 
coat pocket. Then he went back to die house, removed his coat, 
and hung it before die fire. Even now he did not retire, but began 
pacing die floor. The storm without, widi its biting wind and snow- 
blended rain, was terrible, and his old horse was standing in this 



storm without so much as a hlanket to protect him! He should at 
least have given his old friend a roof over his head, since he had 
come such a long distance. 

At the inn across the way die hoy heard an old wall clock 
strike eleven times. Just then he was untying the animals to lead 
them to the shed in the farm yard opposite. It took some time to 
rouse them and get them into line. When all were ready, they 
marched in a long procession into the sting}? farmer's yard, with 
the hoy as their guide. While the hoy had heen assemhling them, 
the farmer had gone the rounds of the farm yard and locked the 
hay shed, so that when the animals came along the door was 
closed. The hoy stood there dismayed. He could not let the 
creatures stand out there! He must go into the house and find the 
key. 

"Keep them quiet out here while I go in and fetch the key!" he 
said to die old horse, and off he ran. 

On die path right in front of die house he paused to think out 
how he should get inside. As he stood there he noticed two little 
wanderers coming down tire road, who stopped before tire inn. 

The boy saw at once that they were two litde girls, and ran 
toward diem. 

"Come now, Britta Maja!" said one, "you mustn't cry any 
more. Now we are at die inn. Here diey will surely take us in." 

The girl had but just said this when die boy called to her: 

"No, you mustn't try to get in diere. It is simply impossible. 
But at die farm house opposite there are no guests. Go tiiere 
instead." 

The littie girls heard die words distincdy, diough diey could 
not see die one who spoke to diem. They did not wonder much at 
diat, however, for die night was as black as pitch. The larger of die 
girls promptiy answered: 

"We don't care to enter that place, because those who live 
diere are stingy and cruel. It is dieir fault diat we two must go out 
on die highways and beg." 

"That may be so," said die boy, "but all die same you should 
go diere. You shall see diat it will be well for you." 

"We can try, but it is doubtful diat diey will even let us enter," 
observed the two little girls as diey walked up to the house and 
knocked. 

The master was standing by die fire diinking of die horse when 
he heard die knocking. He stepped to die door to see what was 
up, diinking all die while diat he would not let himself be tempted 
into admitting any wayfarer. As he fumbled die lock, a gust of 
wind came along, wrenched die door from his hand and swung it 
open. To close it, he had to step out on die porch, and, when he 
stepped back into die house, die two litde girls were standing 
within. 



They were two poor beggar girls, ragged, dirty, and starving- 
two litde tots bent under die burden of dieir beggar's packs, which 
were as large as themselves. 

"Who are you diat go prowling about at diis hour of die 
night?" said die master gruffly. 

The two children did not answer immediately, but first 
removed dieir packs. Then diey walked up to die man and 
stretched fordi dieir tiny hands in greeting. 

"We are Anna and Britta Maja from die Engard," said die 
elder, "and we were going to ask for a night's lodging." 

He did not take die outstretched hands and was just about to 
drive out the beggar children, when a fresh recollection faced him. 
Engard— was not diat a litde cabin where a poor widow widi five 
children had lived? The widow had owed his fadier a few hundred 
kroner and in order to get back his money he had sold her cabin. 
After diat die widow, with her diree eldest children, went to 
Norrland to seek employment, and die two youngest became a 
charge on die parish. 

As he called this to mind he grew bitter. He knew diat his 
fadier had been severely censured for squeezing out diat money, 
which by right belonged to him. 

"What are you doing nowadays?" he asked in a cross tone. 
"Didn't die board of charities take charge of you? Why do you 
roam around and beg?" 

"It's not our fault," replied die larger girl. "The people with 
whom we are living have sent us out to beg." 

"Well, your packs are filled," die farmer observed, "so you 
can't complain. Now you'd better takeout some of die food you 
have widi you and eat your fill, for here you'll get no food, as all 
die women folk are in bed. Later you may lie down in die comer 
by die heardi, so you won't have to freeze." 

He waved his hand, as if to ward them off, and his eyes took 
on a hard look. He was thankful diat he had had a fadier who had 
been careful of his property. Odierwise, he might perhaps have 
been forced in childhood to run about and beg, as diese children 
now did. No sooner had he diought this out to the end dian die 
shrill, mocking voice he had heard once before diat evening 
repeated it, word for word. 

He listened, and at once understood diat it was nodiing— only 
die wind roaring in die chimney. But die queer tiling about it 'was, 
when die wind repeated his dioughts, they seemed so strangely 
stupid and hard and false! 

The children meanwhile had stretched diemselves, side by 
side, on die floor. They were not quiet, but lay diere muttering. 

"Do be still, won't you?" he growled, for he was in such an 
irritable mood diat he could have beaten tiiem. 

But the mumbling continued, and again he called for silence. 



"When mother went away," piped a clear little voice, "she 
made me promise that every night I would say my evening prayer. 
I must do this, and Britta Maja too. As soon as we have said 'God 
who cares for little children—' we'll he quiet." 

The master sat quite still while die little ones said dieir prayers, 
dien he rose and hegan pacing hack and forth, hack and forth, 
wringing his hands all die while, as diough he had met widi some 
great sorrow. 

"The horse driven out and wrecked, diese two children turned 
into road heggars— hodi fadier's doings! Perhaps fadier did not do 
right after all?" he diought. 

He sat down again and huried his head in his hands. Suddenly 
his lips hegan to quiver and into his eyes came tears, which he 
hastily wiped away. Fresh tears came, and he was just as prompt to 
hrush these away; hut it was useless, for more followed. 

When his mother stepped into the room, he swung his chair 
quickly and turned his hack to her. She must have noticed 
something unusual, for she stood quietly hehind him a long while, 
as if waiting for him to speak. She realized how difficult it always is 
for men to talk of die tilings they feel most deeply. She must help 
him of course. 

From her hedroom she had ohserved all that had taken place 
in die living room, so that she did not have to ask any questions. 
She walked very softly over to the two sleeping children, lifted 
them, and hore them to her own hed. Then she went hack to her 
son. 

"Lars," she said, as if she did not see that he was weeping, 
"you had hetter let me keep these children." 

"What, mother?" he gasped, trying to smother the sobs. 

"I have heen suffering for years— ever since father took the 
cahin from their mother, and so have you." 

"Yes, hut-" 

"I want to keep them here and make something of them; they 
are too good to heg." 

He could not speak, for now the tears were heyond his 
control; hut he took his old mother's withered hand and patted it. 

Then he jumped up, as if something had frightened him. 

"What would father have said of this?" 

"Father had his day at ruling," retorted the mother. "Now it is 
your day. As long as father lived we had to ohey him. Now is the 
time to show what you are." Her son was so astonished that he 
ceased crying. "But I have just shown what I am!" he returned. 

"No, you haven't," protested the mother. "You only try to he 
like him. Father experienced hard times, which made him fear 
poverty. He helieved that he had to think of himself first. But you 
have never had any difficulties that should make you hard. You 
have more than you need, and it would he unnatural of you not to 



think of others." 

When die two little girls entered die house the hoy slipped in 
behind diem and secreted himself in a dark comer. He had not 
heen diere long before he caught a glimpse of die shed key, which 
die farmer had thrust into his coat pocket. 

"When the master of die house drives die children out, I'll 
take die key and run," he diought. 

But die children were not driven out and die boy crouched in 
die corner, not knowing what he should do next. 

The modier talked long widi her son, and while she was 
speaking he stopped weeping. Gradually his features softened; he 
looked like anodier person. All die while he was stroking die 
wasted old hand. 

"Now we may as well retire," said the old lady when she saw 
diat he was calm again. 

"No," he said, suddenly rising, "I cannot retire yet. There's a 
stranger widiout whom I must shelter to-night!" 

He said nodiing furdier, but quickly drew on his coat, lit die 
lantern and went out. There were die same wind and chill without, 
but as he stepped to die porch he began to sing softly. He 
wondered if die horse would know him, and if he w r ould be glad to 
come back to his old stable. 

As he crossed die house yard he heard a door slam. 

"That shed door has blown open again," he diought, and went 
over to close it. 

A moment later he stood by the shed and w r as just going to 
shut die door, when he heard a rusding within. 

The boy, wiio had watched his opportunity, had run direcdy to 
die shed, wiiere he left die animals, but diey were no longer out in 
die rain: A strong wind had long since dirown open die door and 
helped diem to get a roof over dieir heads. The patter which die 
master heard was occasioned by die boy running into die shed. 

By die light of die lantern die man could see into the shed. 
The whole floor was covered with sleeping catde. There was no 
human being to be seen; die animals were not bound, but were 
lying, here and diere, in the stow. 

He was enraged at the intrusion and began storming and 
shrieking to rouse die sleepers and drive diem out. But the 
creatures lay still and would not let diemselves be disturbed. The 
only one diat rose was an old horse diat came slowiy tow r ard him. 

All of a sudden die man became silent. He recognized die 
beast by its gait. He raised die lantern, and die horse came over 
and laid its head on his shoulder. The master patted and stroked 
it. 

"My old horsy, my old horsy!" he said. "What have they done 
to you? Yes, dear, I'll buy you back. You'll never again have to 
leave this place. You shall do whatever you like, horsy mine! 



Those whom you have hrought with you may remain here, hut 
you shall come with me to the stable. Now I can give you all the 
oats you are able to eat, without having to smuggle them. And 
you're not all used up, either! The handsomest horse on die 
church knoll— that's what you shall he once more! There, die re! 
There, diere!" 



Ill 

THE BREAKING UP OF THE ICE 

Thursday, April tn r enty-eighth 

THE following day die weather was clear and heautiful. There was 
a strong west wind; people were glad of diat, for it dried up die 
roads, which had heen soaked hy die heavy rains of die day 
before. Early in the morning die two Smaland children, Osa, the 
goose girl, and litde Mats, were out on die highway leading from 
Sormland to Narke. The road ran alongside die southern shore of 
Hjalmar Lake and die children were walking along looking at die 
ice, which covered die greater part of it. The morning sun darted 
its clear rays upon die ice, which did not look dark and 
forbidding, like most spring ice, but sparkled temptingly. As far as 
they could see, the ice was firm and dry. The rain had run down 
into cracks and hollows, or been absorbed by die ice itself. The 
children saw only die sound ice. 

Osa, die goose girl, and litde Mats were on dieir way Nordi, 
and diey could not help diinking of all die steps they would [save] 
if diey could cut straight across die lake instead of going around it. 
They knew, to be sure, diat spring ice is treacherous, but diis 
looked perfecdy secure. They could see diat it was several inches 
diick near the shore. They saw a path which diey might follow, 
and die opposite shore appeared to be so near diat diey ought to 
be able to get diere in an hour. 

"Come, let's try!" said litde Mats. "If we only look before us, 
so diat we don't go down into some hole, we can do it." 

So diey went out on die lake. The ice was not very slipper}', 
but radier easy to walk upon. There was more water on it dian 
diey expected to see, and here and diere were cracks, where die 
water purled up. One had to watch out for such places; but diat 
was easy to do in broad daylight, widi die sun shining. 

The children advanced rapidly, and talked only of how 
sensible diey were to have gone out on die ice instead of tramping 
die slushy road. 

When diey had been walking a while diey came to Vin Island, 



where an old woman had sighted diem from her window. She 
rushed from her cahin, waved diem hack, and shouted something 
which diey could not hear. They understood perfecdy well diat 
she was warning diem not to come any fardier; hut diey diought 
diere was no immediate danger. It would he stupid for diem to 
leave the ice when all was going so well! 

Therefore diey went on past Vin Island and had a stretch of 
seven miles of ice ahead of diem. 

Out diere was so much water diat die children were obliged to 
take roundabout ways; but that was sport to diem. They vied widi 
each odier as to which could find die soundest ice. They were 
neidier tired nor hungry. The whole day was before them, and 
they laughed at each obstacle diey met. 

Now and then they cast a glance ahead at die farther shore. It 
still appeared far away, aldiough they had been walking a good 
hour. They were rather surprised that die lake was so broad. 

"The shore seems to be moving farther away from us," little 
Mats observed. 

Out there die children were not protected against die wind, 
which was becoming stronger and stronger every minute, and was 
pressing dieir clothing so close to their bodies diat diey could 
hardly go on. The cold wind was die first disagreeahle tiling they 
had met with on the journey. 

But the amazing part of it was that the wind came sweeping 
along with a loud roar— as if it hrought with it the noise of a large 
mill or factory, though nothing of the kind w r as to he found out 
there on the ice. They had w r alked to the west of the big island, 
Valen; now they thought they were nearing the north shore. 
Suddenly the wind began to blow more and more, while the loud 
roaring increased so rapidly that they began to feel uneasy. 

All at once it occurred to them that the roar was caused hy the 
foaming and rushing of the waves hreaking against a shore. Even 
this seemed improbable, since die lake was still covered with ice. 

At all events, they paused and looked about. They noticed far 
in die west a white bank which stretched clear across the lake. At 
first they thought it was a snowbank alongside a road. Later they 
realized it was die foam-capped waves dashing against die ice! 
They took hold of hands and ran without saying a word. Open sea 
lay beyond in the west, and suddenly die streak of foam appeared 
to be moving eastward. They wondered if die ice was going to 
break all over. What was going to happen? They felt now that they 
were in great danger. 

All at once it seemed as if the ice under their feet rose— rose 
and sank, as if some one from helow were pushing it. Presently 
they heard a hollow boom, and then there were cracks in the ice 
all around them. The children could see how r they crept along 
under die ice-covering. 



The next moment all was still, then the rising and sinking 
hegan again. Thereupon the cracks hegan to widen into crevices 
through which die water bubbled up. By and by die crevices 
became gaps. Soon after diat die ice was divided into large floes. 

"Osa," said little Mats, "diis must be the breaking up of the 
ice! 

"Why, so it is, litde Mats," said Osa, "but as yet we can get to 
land. Run for your life!" 

As a matter of fact, die wind and waves had a good deal of 
work to do yet to clear the ice from die lake. The hardest part was 
done when the ice-cake burst into pieces, but all diese pieces must 
be broken and hurled against each odier, to be crushed, worn 
down, and dissolved. There was still a great deal of hard and 
sound ice left, which formed large, unbroken surfaces. 

The greatest danger for die children lay in the fact diat diey 
had no general view of the ice. They did not see die places where 
die gaps were so wide diat tiiey could not possibly jump over 
diem, nor did tiiey know where to find any floes diat would hold 
diem, so tiiey wandered aimlessly back and forth, going fardier out 
on die lake instead of nearer land. At last, confused and terrified, 
tiiey stood still and wept. 

Then a flock of wild geese in rapid flight came rushing by. 
They shrieked loudly and sharply; but die strange tiling was that 
above the geese-cackle the little children heard diese words: 

"You must go to die right, die right, the right!" They began at 
once to follow die advice; but before long tiiey were again standing 
irresolute, facing anodier broad gap. 

Again tiiey heard die geese shrieking above them, and again, 
amid die geese-cackle, diey distinguished a few words: 

"Stand where you are! Stand where you are!" 

The children did not say a word to each other, but obeyed and 
stood still. Soon after that the ice-floes floated togedier, so that 
tiiey could cross die gap. Then tiiey took hold of hands again and 
ran. They were afraid not only of die peril, but of the mysterious 
help that had come to diem. 

Soon tiiey had to stop again, and immediately die sound of die 
voice reached diem. 

"Straight ahead, straight ahead!" it said. 

This leading continued for about half an hour; by diat time 
tiiey had reached Ljunger Point, where diey left the ice and waded 
to shore. They were still terribly frightened, even though diey were 
on firm land. They did not stop to look back at die lake— where 
the waves were pitching the ice-floes faster and faster— but ran on. 
When diey had gone a short distance along die point, Osa paused 
suddenly. 

"Wait here, litde Mats," she said; "I have forgotten 
somediing." 



Osa, die goose girl, went down to die strand again, where she 
stopped to rummage in her hag. Finally she fished out a little 
wooden shoe, which she placed on a stone where it could he 
plainly seen. Then she ran to little Mats without once looking 
hack. 

But die instant her hack was turned, a hig white goose shot 
down from die sky, like a streak of lightning, snatched die wooden 
shoe, and flew away widi it. 



rv 

THUMBIETOT AND THE BEARS 

THE IRONWORKS 

Thursday, April twenty-eighth 

WHEN die wild geese and Thumbietot had helped Osa, the 
goose girl, and little Mats across die ice, diey flew into 
Westmanland, where diey alighted in a grain field to feed and rest. 

A strong west wind blew almost die entire day on which the 
wild geese traveled over die mining districts, and as soon as diey 
attempted to direct dieir course northward diey were buffeted 
toward die east. Now r , Akka diought diat Smirre Fox was at large 
in die eastern part of die province; dierefore she would not fly in 
diat direction, but turned back, time and again, struggling 
westward widi great difficulty. At diis rate die wild geese advanced 
very slowly, and late in die afternoon diey were still in the 
Westmanland mining districts. Tow r ard evening die wind abated 
suddenly, and die tired travelers hoped diat diey would have an 
interval of easy flight before sundown. Then along came a violent 
gust of wind, which tossed die geese before it, like balls, and die 
boy, who was sitting comfortably, with no thought of peril, was 
lifted from die goose's back and hurled into space. 

Little and light as he was, he could not fall straight to the 
ground in such a wind; so at first he was carried along witii it, 
drifting down slowly and spasmodically, as a leaf falls from a tree. 

"Why, diis isn't so bad!" diought die boy as he fell. "I'm 
tumbling as easily as if I were only a scrap of paper. Morten 
Goosey-Gander will doubtiess hurry along and pick me up." 

The first tiling die boy did when he landed was to tear off his 
cap and wave it, so diat die big white gander should see where he 
was. 

"Here am I, where are you? Here am I, wiiere are you?" he 
called, and was radier surprised diat Morten Goosey-Gander was 



not already at his side. 

But die big white gander was not to be seen, nor was die wild 
goose flock outiined against die sky. It had entirely disappeared. 

He thought diis radier singular, but he was neither worried nor 
frightened. Not for a second did it occur to him that folk like 
Akka and Morten Goosey-Gander would abandon him. The 
unexpected gust of wind had probably borne diem along witii it. 
As soon as diey could manage to turn, diey would surely come 
back and fetch him. 

But what was diis? Where on eardi was he anyway? He had 
been standing gazing toward die sky for some sign of die geese, 
but now he happened to glance about him. He had not come 
down on even ground, but had dropped into a deep, wide 
mountain cave— or whatever it might be. It was as large as a 
church, witii almost perpendicular walls on all four sides, and with 
no roof at all. On the ground were some huge rocks, between 
which moss and lignon-brush and dwarfed birches grew. Here and 
diere in die wall were projections, from which swung rickety 
ladders. At one side diere was a dark passage, which apparendy 
led far into die mountain. 

The boy had not been traveling over die mining districts a 
whole day for nodiing. He comprehended at once diat die big 
cleft had been made by die men wiio had mined ore in diis place. 

"I must try and climb back to eardi again," he diought, 
"otherwise I fear diat my companions won't find me!" 

He was about to go over to die wall when some one seized 
him from behind, and he heard a gruff voice growl in his ear: 
"Who are you?" 

The boy turned quickly, and, in die confusion of die moment, 
he diought he was facing a huge rock, covered witii brownish 
moss. Then he noticed diat the rock had broad paws to walk with, 
a head, two eyes, and a growling moudi. 

He could not pull himself togedier to answer, nor did the big 
beast appear to expect it of him, for it knocked him down, rolled 
him back and forth with its paws, and nosed him. It seemed just 
about ready to swallow him, when it changed its mind and called: 
"Brumme and Mulle, come here, you cubs, and you shall have 
some tiling good to eat!" 

A pair of frowzy cubs, as uncertain on dieir feet and as woolly 
as puppies, came tumbling along. 

"What have you got, Mamma Bear? May we see, oh, may we 
see?" shrieked die cubs excitedly. 

"Oho! so I've fallen in with bears," diought the boy to himself. 
"Now Smirre Fox won't have to trouble himself further to chase 
after me!" 

The mother bear pushed die boy along to the cubs. One of 
them nabbed him quickly and ran off with him; but he did not bite 



hard. He was playful and wanted to amuse himself awhile with 
Thumhietot before eating him. The other cub was after the first 
one to snatch the boy for himself, and as he lumbered along he 
managed to tumble straight down on the head of the one that 
carried the boy. So the two cubs rolled over each other, biting, 
clawing, and snarling. 

During the tussle the boy got loose, ran over to die wall, and 
started to scale it. Then both cubs scurried after him, and, nimbly 
scaling the cliff, they caught up with him and tossed him down on 
the moss, like a ball. 

"Now I know how a poor little mousie fares when it falls into 
the cat's claws," thought the boy. 

He made several attempts to get away. He ran deep down into 
the old tunnel and hid behind the rocks and climbed the birches, 
but the cubs hunted him out, go where he would. The instant they 
caught him they let him go, so that he could run away again and 
they should have the fun of recapturing him. 

At last the boy got so sick and tired of it all that he threw 
himself down on the ground. 

"Run away," growled the cubs, "or we'll eat you up!" 

"You'll have to eat me then," said the boy, "for I can't run any 
more." 

Immediately both cubs rushed over to the mother bear and 
complained: 

"Mamma Bear, oh, Mamma Bear, he won't play any more." 

"Then you must divide him evenly between you," said Mother 
Bear. 

When the boy heard this he was so scared that he jumped up 
instantly and began playing again. 

As it was bedtime, Mother Bear called to the cubs that they 
must come now and cuddle up to her and go to sleep. They had 
been having such a good time that they wished to continue their 
play next day; so they took the boy between them and laid their 
paws over him. They did not want him to move without waking 
them. They went to sleep immediately. The boy thought that after 
a while he would try to steal away. But never in all his life had he 
been so tumbled and tossed and hunted and rolled! And he was 
so tired out that he too fell asleep. 

By and by Father Bear came clambering down the mountain 
wall. The boy was wakened by his tearing away stone and gravel as 
he swung himself into the old mine. The boy was afraid to move 
much; but he managed to stretch himself and turn over, so that he 
could see the big bear. He was a frightfully coarse, huge old beast, 
with great paws, large, glistening tusks, and wicked little eyes! The 
boy could not help shuddering as he looked at this old monarch 
of the forest. 

"It smells like a human being around here," said Father Bear 



die instant he came up to Mother Bear, and his growl was as die 
rolling of thunder. 

"How can you imagine anydiing so ahsurd?" said Modier Bear 
widiout disturbing herself. "It has been setded for good and all 
diat we are not to harm mankind any more; but if one of diem 
were to put in an appearance here, where die cubs and I have our 
quarters, diere wouldn't be enough left of him for you to catch 
even a scent of him!" 

Father Bear lay down beside Mother Bear. "You ought to 
know me well enough to understand diat I don't allow anydiing 
dangerous to come near die cubs. Talk, instead, of what you have 
been doing. I haven't seen you for a whole week!" 

"I've been looking about for a new residence," said Fadier 
Bear. "First I went over to Vermland, to learn from our kinsmen 
at Eksharad how they fared in diat country; but I had my trouble 
for nothing. There wasn't a bear's den left in die whole forest." 

"I believe the humans want die whole eardi to diemselves," 
said Modier Bear. "Fven if we leave people and catde in peace 
and live solely upon lignon and insects and green things, we 
cannot remain unmolested in die forest! I wonder where we could 
move to in order to live in peace?" 

"We've lived comfortably for many years in diis pit," observed 
Fadier Bear. "But I can't be content here now since die big noise- 
shop has been built right in our neighbourhood. Lately I have 
been taking a look at die land east of Dal River, over by Garpen 
Mountain. Old mine pits are plentiful diere, too, and odier fine 
retreats. I diought it looked as if one might be fairly well protected 
against men—" 

The instant Fadier Bear said diis he sat up and began to sniff. 

"It's extraordinary that whenever I speak of human beings I 
catch diat queer scent again," he remarked. 

"Go and see for yourself if you don't believe me!" challenged 
Modier Bear. "I should just like to know where a human being 
could manage to hide down here?" 

The bear walked all around die cave, and nosed. Finally he 
went back and lay down widiout a word. 

"What did I tell you?" said Modier Bear. "But of course you 
diink diat no one but yourself has any nose or ears!" 

"One can't be too careful, widi such neighbours as we have," 
said Father Bear gentiy. Then he leaped up with a roar. As luck 
would have it, one of die cubs had moved a paw over to Nils 
Holgersson's face and die poor little wretch could not breadie, but 
began to sneeze. It was impossible for Modier Bear to keep 
Fadier Bear back any longer. He pushed die young ones to right 
and left and caught sight of die boy before he had time to sit up. 

He would have swallowed him instantiy if Modier Bear had 
not cast herself between them. 



"Don't touch him! He belongs to die cubs," she said. "They 
have had such fun widi him die whole evening diat diey couldn't 
bear to eat him up, but wanted to save him until morning." 

Fadier Bear pushed Modier Bear aside. 

"Don't meddle with what you don't understand!" he roared. 
"Can't you scent diat human odour about him from afar? I shall 
eat him at once, or he will play us some mean trick." 

He opened his jaws again; but meanwhile the boy had had 
time to diink, and, quick as a flash, he dug into his knapsack and 
brought forth some matches— his sole weapon of defence— struck 
one on his leatiier breeches, and stuck die burning match into die 
bear's open moudi. 

Fadier Bear snorted when he smelled die sulphur, and witii 
diat die flame went out. The boy was ready widi anodier match, 
but, curiously enough, Fadier Bear did not repeat his attack. 

"Can you light many of diose little blue roses?" asked Fadier 
Bear. 

"I can light enough to put an end to die whole forest," replied 
die boy, for he tiiought diat in diis way he might be able to scare 
Fadier Bear. 

"Perhaps you could also set fire to houses and barns?" said 
Fadier Bear. 

"Oh, diat would be no trick for me!" boasted die boy, hoping 
diat diis would make die bear respect him. 

"Good!" exclaimed die bear. "You shall render me a service. 
Now Fm very glad diat I did not eat you!" 

Fadier Bear carefully took die boy between his tusks and 
climbed up from die pit. He did diis widi remarkable ease and 
agility, considering diat he was so big and heavy. As soon as he was 
up, he speedily made for die woods. It was evident diat Father 
Bear was created to squeeze through dense forests. The heavy 
body pushed tiirough die brushwood as a boat does dirough die 
water. 

Fadier Bear ran along till he came to a hill at die skirt of die 
forest, where he could see the big noise-shop. Here he lay down 
and placed die boy in front of him, holding him securely between 
his forepaws. 

"Now look down at diat big noise -shop!" he commanded. 

The great ironworks, widi many tall buildings, stood at the 
edge of a waterfall. High chimneys sent fortii dark clouds of 
smoke, blasting furnaces were in full blaze, and light shone from 
all die windows and apertures. Within hammers and rolling mills 
were going widi such force that the air rang widi dieir clatter and 
boom. All around the workshops proper were immense coal 
sheds, great slag heaps, warehouses, wood piles, and tool sheds. 
Just beyond were long rows of workingmen's homes, pretty villas, 
school-houses, assembly halls, and shops. But there all was quiet 



and apparently everybody was asleep. The boy did not glance in 
diat direction, but gazed intently at the ironworks. The earth 
around diem was black; the sky above them was like a great fiery 
dome; die rapids, white widi foam, rushed by; while die buildings 
diemselves were sending out light and smoke, fire and sparks. It 
was die grandest sight die boy had ever seen! 

"Surely you don't mean to say you can set fire to a place like 
diat?" remarked die bear doubtingly. 

The boy stood wedged between die beast's paws thinking die 
only diing diat might save him would be diat die bear should have 
a high opinion of his capability and power. 

"It's all the same to me," he answered with a superior air. "Big 
or litde, I can burn it down." 

"Then I'll tell you something," said Father Bear, "My 
forefadiers lived in diis region from die time diat die forests first 
sprang up. From diem I inherited hunting grounds and pastures, 
lairs and retreats, and have lived here in peace all my life. In die 
beginning I wasn't troubled much by die human kind. They dug in 
die mountains and picked up a litde ore down here, by die rapids; 
diey had a forge and a furnace, but die hammers sounded only a 
few hours during die day, and die furnace was not fired more dian 
two moons at a stretch. It wasn't so bad but diat I could stand it; 
but diese last years, since they have built diis noise-shop, which 
keeps up the same racket both day and night, life here has 
become intolerable. Formerly only a manager and a couple of 
blacksmidis lived here, but now diere are so many people diat I 
can never feel safe from diem. I diought diat I should have to 
move away, but I have discovered something better!" 

The boy wondered what Fadier Bear had hit upon, but no 
opportunity was afforded him to ask, as die bear took him 
between his tusks again and lumbered down the hill. The boy 
could see nothing, but knew by die increasing noise diat diey were 
approaching die rolling mills. 

Fadier Bear was well informed regarding die ironworks. He 
had prowled around diere on many a dark night, had observed 
what went on within, and had wondered if diere would never be 
any cessation of die work. He had tested die walls widi his paws 
and wished diat he were only strong enough to knock down die 
whole structure with a single blow. 

He was not easily distinguishable against die dark ground, and 
when, in addition, he remained in die shadow of die walls, diere 
was not much danger of his being discovered. Now he walked 
fearlessly between die workshops and climbed to the top of a slag 
heap. There he sat up on his haunches, took die boy between his 
forepaws and held him up. 

"Try to look into die house!" he commanded. A strong 
current of air was forced into a big cylinder which was suspended 



from die ceiling and filled widi molten iron. As this current rushed 
into die mess of iron widi an awful roar, showers of sparks of all 
colours spurted up in bunches, in sprays, in long clusters! They 
struck against die wall and came splashing down over die whole 
big room. Fadier Bear let die boy watch die gorgeous spectacle 
until die blowing was over and die flowing and sparkling red steel 
had been poured into ingot moulds. 

The boy was completely charmed by die marvellous display 
and almost forgot diat he was imprisoned between a bear's two 
paws. 

Fadier Bear let him look into die rolling mill. He saw a 
workman take a short, diick bar of iron at white heat from a 
furnace opening and place it under a roller. When the iron came 
out from under die roller, it was flattened and extended. 
Immediately another workman seized it and placed it beneadi a 
heavier roller, which made it still longer and diinner. Thus it was 
passed from roller to roller, squeezed and drawn out until, finally, 
it curled along die door, like a long red diread. 

But while die first bar of iron was being pressed, a second was 
taken from the furnace and placed under die rollers, and when 
this was a little along, a third was brought. Continuously fresh 
direads came crawling over die floor, like hissing snakes. The boy 
was dazzled by die iron. But he found it more splendid to watch 
die workmen who, dexterously and delicately, seized die glowing 
snakes widi dieir tongs and forced diem under die rollers. It 
seemed like play for diem to handle die hissing iron. 

"I call diat real man's work!" die boy remarked to himself. 

The bear dien let die boy have a peep at die furnace and die 
forge, and he became more and more astonished as he saw how 
die blacksmiths handled iron and fire. 

"Those men have no fear of heat and flames," he diought. 
The workmen were sooty and grimy. He fancied diey were some 
sort of fire -folk— diat was why diey could bend and mould die iron 
as they wished. He could not believe diat diey were just ordinary 
men, since they had such power! 

"They keep diis up day after day, night after night," said Fadier 
Bear, as he dropped wearily down on the ground. "You can 
understand diat one gets radier tired of diat kind of tiling. I'm 
mighty glad diat at last I can put an end to it!" 

"Indeed!" said the boy. "How will you go about it?" 

"Oh, I diought diat you were going to set fire to die buildings!" 
said Fadier Bear. "That would put an end to all diis work, and I 
could remain in my old home." 

The boy was all of a shiver. 

So it was for this diat Fadier Bear had brought him here! 

"If you will set fire to the noise-works, I'll promise to spare 
your life," said Fadier Bear. "But if you don't do it, I'll make short 



work of you!" 

The huge workshops were huilt of hrick, and die hoy was 
thinking to himself that Fadier Bear could command as much as 
he liked, it was impossible to obey him. Presendy he saw that it 
might not he impossible after all. Just beyond diem lay a pile of 
chips and shavings to which he could easily set fire, and beside it 
was a wood pile diat almost reached die coal shed. The coal shed 
extended over to die workshops, and if diat once caught lire, the 
flames would soon fly over to the roof of die iron foundry. 
Everydiing combustible would burn, die walls would fall from die 
heat, and die machinery would he destroyed. "Will you or won't 
you?" demanded Fadier Bear. The hoy knew diat he ought to 
answer prompdy diat he would not, hut he also knew diat then the 
hear's paws would squeeze him to deadi; dierefore he replied: 

"I shall have to diink it over." 

"Very well, do so," assented Fadier Bear. "Let me say to you 
diat iron is die tiling that has given men the advantage over us 
hears, which is anodier reason for my wishing to put an end to die 
work here." 

The hoy diought he would use die delay to figure out some 
plan of escape, hut he was so worried he could not direct his 
thoughts where he would; instead he hegan to diink of the great 
help that iron had been to mankind. They needed iron for 
everydiing. There was iron in die plough diat broke up die field, 
in die axe diat felled die tree for building houses, in die scythe that 
mowed die grain, and in die knife, which could be turned to all 
sorts of uses. There was iron in die horse's bit, in die lock on die 
door, in die nails diat held furniture togedier, in die sheathing that 
covered the roof. The rifle which drove away wild beasts was 
made of iron, also die pick diat had broken up die mine. Iron 
covered die men-of-war he had seen at Karlskrona; die 
locomotives steamed dirough the country on iron rails; the needle 
diat had stitched his coat was of iron; die shears that clipped die 
sheep and the kettie diat cooked die food. Big and littie alike- 
much that was indispensable was made from iron. Fadier Bear was 
perfectly right in saying that it was the iron that had given men 
their mastery over the bears. 

"Now will you or won't you?" Father Bear repeated. 

The boy was starded from his musing. Here he stood diinking 
of matters that were entirely unnecessary, and had not yet found a 
way to save himself] 

"You mustn't be so impatient," he said. "This is a serious 
matter for me, and I've got to have time to consider." 

"Well, then, consider anodier moment," said Fadier Bear. 
"But let me tell you diat it's because of die iron that men have 
become so much wiser than we bears. For this alone, if for 
nothing else, I should like to put a stop to die work here." 



Again die boy endeavoured to diink out a plan of escape, but 
his thoughts wandered, willy nilly. They were taken up widi die 
iron. And gradually he began to comprehend how much thinking 
and calculating men must have done before diey discovered how 
to produce iron from ore, and he seemed to see sooty blacksmiths 
of old bending over die forge, pondering how diey should 
properly handle it. Perhaps it was because diey had diought so 
much about die iron diat intelligence had been developed in 
mankind, until finally diey became so advanced diat diey were 
able to build great works like diese. The fact was that men owed 
more to the iron dian diey themselves knew. 

"Well, what say you? Will you or won't you?" insisted Fadier 
Bear. 

The boy shrank back. Here he stood diinking needless 
thoughts, and had no idea as to what he should do to save himself. 

"It's not such an easy matter to decide as you diink," he 
answered. "You must give me time for reflection." 

"I can wait for you a little longer," said Fadier Bear. "But after 
diat you'll get no more grace. You must know diat it's die fault of 
die iron diat die human kind can live here on die property of die 
bears. And now you understand why I would be rid of die work." 

The boy meant to use the last moment to diink out some way 
to save himself, but, anxious and distraught as he was, his thoughts 
wandered again. Now he began diinking of all diat he had seen 
when he flew over die mining districts. It was strange diat diere 
should be so much life and activity and so much work back diere 
in die wilderness. 

"Just diink how poor and desolate diis place would be had 
diere been no iron here! 

"This very foundry gave employment to many, and had 
gadiered around it many homes filled widi people, who, in turn, 
had attracted hitiier railways and telegraph wires and—" 

"Come, come!" growled die bear. "Will you or won't you?" 

The boy swept his hand across his forehead. No plan of 
escape had as yet come to his mind, but this much he knew— he 
did not wish to do any harm to die iron, which was so useful to 
rich and poor alike, and which gave bread to so many people in 
diis land. 

"I won't!" he said. 

Fadier Bear squeezed him a little harder, but said nodiing. 

"You'll not get me to destroy die ironworks!" defied die boy. 
"The iron is so great a blessing diat [I] will never do to harm it." 

"Then of course you don't expect to be allowed to live very 
long?" said the bear. 

"No, I don't expect it," returned die boy, looking die bear 
straight in die eye. 

Fadier Bear gripped him still harder. It hurt so diat die boy 



could not keep the tears back, but he did not cry out or say a 
word. 

"Very well, dien," said Fadier Bear, raising his paw very slowly, 
hoping diat die boy would give in at the last moment. 

But just dien die boy heard something click very close to 
diem, and saw die muzzle of a rifle two paces away. Bodi he and 
Fadier Bear had been so engrossed in their own affairs diey had 
not observed diat a man had stolen right upon diem. 

"Fadier Bear! Don't you hear die clicking of a trigger?" cried 
die boy. "Run, or you'll be shot!" 

Fadier Bear grew terribly hurried. However, he allowed 
himself time enough to pick up die boy and carry him along. As 
he ran, a couple of shots sounded, and die bullets grazed his ears, 
but, luckily, he escaped. 

The boy diought, as he was dangling from die bear's moudi, 
diat never had he been so stupid as he was to-night. If he had only 
kept still, die bear would have been shot, and he himself would 
have been freed. But he had become so accustomed to helping 
die animals diat he did it naturally, and as a matter of course. 

When Father Bear had run some distance into die woods, he 
paused and set die boy down on die ground. 

"Thank you, littie one!" he said. "I dare say diose bullets 
would have caught me if you hadn't been diere. And now I want 
to do you a sendee in return. If you should ever meet widi anodier 
bear, just say to him this— which I shall whisper to you— and he 
won't touch you." 

Fadier Bear whispered a word or two into die boy's ear and 
hurried away, for he diought he heard hounds and hunters 
pursuing him. 

The boy stood in die forest, free and unharmed, and could 
hardly understand how it was possible. 

The wild geese had been flying back and forth die whole 
evening, peering and calling, but they had been unable to find 
Thumbietot. They searched long after the sun had set, and, 
finally, when it had grown so dark diat diey were forced to alight 
somewhere for die night, diey were very downhearted. There was 
not one among diem but diought die boy had been killed by the 
fall and was lying dead in die forest, where diey could not see him. 

But die next morning, when the sun peeped over the hills and 
awakened die wild geese, the boy lay sleeping, as usual, in dieir 
midst. When he woke and heard diem shrieking and cackling 
their astonishment, he could not help laughing. 

They w r ere so eager to know what had happened to him diat 
diey did not care to go to breakfast until he had told diem die 
whole story. The boy soon narrated his entire adventure with die 
bears, but after diat he seemed reluctant to continue. 

"How I got back to you perhaps you already know?" he said. 



"No, we know nothing. We thought you were killed." 

"That's curious!" remarked the hoy. "Oh, yes!— when Father 
Bear left me I climhed up into a pine and fell asleep. At dayhreak 
I was awakened hy an eagle hovering over me. He picked me up 
widi his talons and carried me away. He didn't hurt me, hut flew 
straight here to you and dropped me down among you." 

"Didn't he tell you who he was?" asked the big white gander. 

"He was gone before I had time even to thank him. I thought 
that Mother Akka had sent him after me." 

"How extraordinary!" exclaimed the white goosey-gander. 
"But are you certain that it was an eagle?" 

"I had never before seen an eagle," said the boy, "but he was 
so big and splendid that I can't give him a lowlier name!" 

Morten Goosey-Gander turned to the wild geese to hear what 
they thought of this; but they stood gazing into the air, as though 
they were thinking of something else. 

"We must not forget entirely to eat breakfast today," said 
Akka, quickly spreading her wings. 



V 
THE FLOOD 

THE SWANS 

May first to fourth 

THERE was a terrible storm raging in the district north of Lake 
Malar, which lasted several days. The sky was a dull gray, the wind 
whistled, and the rain beat. Both people and animals knew tire 
spring could not be ushered in with anything short of this; 
nevertheless they thought it unbearable. 

After it had been raining for a whole day, tire snowdrifts in the 
pine forests began to melt in earnest, and tire spring brooks grew 
lively. All tire pools on tire farms, tire standing water in tire ditches, 
the water that oozed between tire tufts in marshes and swanrps— all 
were in motion and tried to find their way to creeks, that they 
might be borne along to tire sea. 

The creeks rushed as fast as possible down to the rivers, and 
the rivers did their utmost to carry the water to Lake Malar. 

All tire lakes and rivers in Uppland and tire mining district 
quickly threw off their ice covers on one and tire same day, so that 
the creeks filled with icefloes which rose clear up to their banks. 

Swollen as they were, they emptied into Lake Malar, and it 
was not long before tire lake had taken in as much water as it 



could well hold. Down by die oudet was a raging torrent. 
Norrstrom is a narrow channel, and it could not let out the water 
quickly enough. Besides, diere was a strong easterly wind diat 
lashed against die land, obstructing die stream when it tried to 
carry die fresh water into die East Sea. Since die rivers kept 
running to Malaren with more water than it could dispose of, there 
was nothing for die big lake to do but overflow its banks. 

It rose very slowly, as if reluctant to injure its beautiful shores; 
but as they were mostly low and gradually sloping, it was not long 
before the water had flooded several acres of land, and diat was 
enough to create die greatest alarm. 

Lake Malar is unique in its way, being made up of a succession 
of narrow fiords, bays, and inlets. In no place does it spread into a 
storm centre, but seems to have been created only for pleasure 
trips, yachting tours, and fishing. Nowhere does it present barren, 
desolate, wind-swept shores. It looks, as if it never diought diat its 
shores could hold anydiing but country seats, summer villas, 
manors, and amusement resorts. But, because it usually presents a 
very agreeable and friendly appearance, diere is all die more 
havoc whenever it happens to drop its smiling expression in die 
spring, and show diat it can be serious. 

At diat critical time Smirre Fox happened to come sneaking 
dirough a birch grove just nordi of Lake Malar. As usual, he was 
diinking of Thumbietot and die wild geese, and wondering how he 
should ever find diem again. He had lost all track of diem. 

As he stole cautiously along, more discouraged dian usual, he 
caught sight of Agar, die carrier-pigeon, who had perched herself 
on a birch branch. 

"My, but I'm in luck to run across you, Agar!" exclaimed 
Smirre. "Maybe you can tell me where Akka from Kebnekaise 
and her flock hold fordi nowadays?" 

"It's quite possible that I know where diey are," Agar hinted, 
"but I'm not likely to tell you!" 

"Please yourself]" retorted Smirre. "Neverdieless, you can take 
a message diat I have for diem. You probably know die present 
condition of Lake Malar? There's a great overflow down diere 
and all die swans who live in Hjalsta Bay are about to see tiieir 
nests, widi all tiieir eggs, destroyed. Daylight, die swan-king, has 
heard of die midget who travels with die wild geese and knows a 
remedy for every ill. He has sent me to ask Akka if she will bring 
Thumbietot down to Hjalsta Bay." 

"I dare say I can convey your message," Agar replied, "but I 
can't understand how r die little boy will be able to help die swans." 

"Nor do I," said Smirre, "but he can do almost everything it 
seems." 

"It's surprising to me that Daylight should send his messages 



by a fox," Agar remarked. 

"Well, we're not exactly what you'd call good friends," said 
Smirre smoothly, "but in an emergency like diis we must help 
each odier. Perhaps it would be just as well not to tell Akka diat 
you got the message from a fox. Between you and me, she's 
inclined to be a little suspicious." 

The safest refuge for water-fowl in die whole Malar district is 
Hjalsta Bay. It has low shores, shallow water and is also covered 
widi reeds. 

It is by no means as large as Lake Takern, but neverdieless 
Hjalsta is a good retreat for birds, since it has long been forbidden 
territory to hunters. 

It is die home of a great many swans, and die owner of die old 
casde near by has prohibited all shooting on die bay, so diat diey 
might be unmolested. 

As soon as Akka received word diat die swans needed her 
help, she hastened down to Hjalsta Bay. She arrived widi her flock 
one evening and saw at a glance diat diere had been a great 
disaster. The big swans' nests had been torn away, and the strong 
wind was driving diem down die bay. Some had already fallen 
apart, two or diree had capsized, and die eggs lay at die bottom of 
die lake. 

When Akka alighted on the bay, all die swans living diere were 
gadiered near die eastern shore, where diey were protected from 
die wind. 

Although they had suffered much by die flood, diey were too 
proud to let any one see it. 

"It is useless to cry," diey said. "There are plenty of root-fibres 
and stems here; we can soon build new nests." 

None had diought of asking a stranger to help diem, and die 
swans had no idea diat Smirre Fox had sent for die wild geese! 

There were several hundred swans resting on die water. They 
had placed themselves according to rank and station. The young 
and inexperienced were fardiest out, die old and wise nearer die 
middle of die group, and right in die centre sat Daylight, die swan- 
king and Snow- White, the swan-queen, who were older dian any 
of the odiers and regarded die rest of die swans as dieir children. 

The geese alighted on die west shore of die bay; but when 
Akka saw where the swans were, she swam toward diem at once. 
She was very much surprised at their having sent for her, but she 
regarded it as an honour and did not wish to lose a moment in 
coming to dieir aid. 

As Akka approached die swans she paused to see if die geese 
who followed her swam in a straight line, and at even distances 
apart. 

"Now, swim along quickly!" she ordered. "Don't stare at die 
swans as if you had never before seen anything beautiful, and 



don't mind what die)' may say to you!" 

This was not the first time diat Akka had called on the 
aristocratic swans. They had always received her in a manner 
befitting a great traveler like herself. 

But still she did not like the idea of swimming in among them. 
She never felt so gray and insignificant as when she happened 
upon swans. One or another of them was sure to drop a remark 
ahout "common gray-feathers" and "poor folk." But it is always 
best to take no notice of such tilings. 

This time everything passed off uncommonly well. The swans 
politely made way for the wild geese, who swam forward through a 
kind of passageway, which formed an avenue bordered by 
shimmering, white birds. 

It was a beautiful sight to watch them as they spread their 
wings, like sails, to appear well before the strangers. They 
refrained from making comments, which rather surprised Akka. 

Evidently Daylight had noted their misbehaviour in the past 
and had told the swans that they must conduct themselves in a 
proper manner— so thought the leader-goose. 

But just as the swans were making an effort to observe the 
rules of etiquette, they caught sight of the goosey-gander, who 
swam last in the long goose-line. Then there was a murmur of 
disapproval, even of threats, among the swans, and at once there 
was an end to their good deportment! 

"What's this?" shrieked one. "Do the wild geese intend to 
dress up in white feathers?" 

"They needn't think that will make swans of them," cried 
another. 

They began shrieking— one louder than another— in their 
strong, resonant voices. It was impossible to explain that a tame 
goosey-gander had come with the wild geese. 

"That must be the goose-king himself coming along," they said 
tauntingly. "There's no limit to their audacity!" 

"That's no goose, it's only a tame duck." 

The big white gander remembered Akka's admonition to pay 
no attention, no matter what he might hear. He kept quiet and 
swam ahead as fast he could, but it did no good. The swans 
became more and more impertinent. 

"What kind of a frog does he carry on his back?" asked one. 
"They must think we don't see it's a frog because it is dressed like 
a human being." 

The swans, who but a moment before had been resting in 
such perfect order, now swam up and down excitedly. All tried to 
crowd forward to get a glimpse of the white wild goose. 

"That white goosey-gander ought to be ashamed to come here 
and parade before swans!" 

"He's probably as gray as the rest of them. He has only been 



in a flour barrel at some farm house!" 

Akka had just come up to Daylight and was about to ask him 
what kind of help he wanted of her, when die swan-king noticed 
die uproar among die swans. 

"What do I see? Haven't I taught you to be polite to 
strangers?" he said widi a frown. 

Snow-White, die swan-queen, swam out to restore order 
among her subjects, and again Daylight turned to Akka. 

Presendy Snow-White came back, appearing gready agitated. 

"Can't you keep diem quiet?" shouted Daylight. 

"There's a white wild goose over diere," answered Snow- 
White. "Is it not shameful? I don't wonder diey are furious!" 

"A white wild goose?" scoffed Daylight. "That's too ridiculous! 
There can't be such a tiling. You must be mistaken." 

The crowds around Morten Goosey-Gander grew larger and 
larger. Akka and die odier wild geese tried to swim over to him, 
but were jostled hidier and diitiier and could not get to him. 

The old swan-king, who was die strongest among them, swam 
off quickly, pushed all die odiers aside, and made his way over to 
die big white gander. But when he saw diat there really was a white 
goose on the water, he was just as indignant as die rest. 

He hissed widi rage, flew straight at Morten Goosey-Gander 
and tore out a few feathers. 

"I'll teach you a lesson, wild goose," he shrieked, "so diat 
you'll not come again to die swans, togged out in diis way!" 

"Fly, Morten Goosey-Gander! Fly, fly!" cried Akka, for she 
knew that otherwise the swans would pull out every feadier the 
goosey-gander had. 

"Fly, fly!" screamed Thumbietot, too. 

But die goosey-gander-was so hedged in by the swans that he 
had not room enough to spread his wings. All around him die 
swans stretched dieir long necks, opened dieir strong bills, and 
plucked his feadiers. 

Morten Goosey-Gander defended himself as best he could, by 
striking and biting. The wild geese also began to fight die swans. 

It was obvious how this would have ended had die geese not 
received help quite unexpectedly. 

A red-tail noticed that they were being roughly treated by die 
swans. Instandy he cried out die shrill call diat litde birds use when 
diey need help to drive off a hawk or a falcon. 

Three calls had barely sounded when all die litde birds in die 
vicinity came shooting down to Hjalsta Bay, as if on wings of 
lightning. 

These delicate litde creatures swooped down upon die swans, 
screeched in dieir ears, and obstructed dieir view widi die flutter 
of dieir tiny wings. They made diem dizzy widi dieir fluttering and 
drove diem to distraction with their cries of "Shame, shame, 



swans!" 

The attack of die small birds lasted but a moment. When diey 
were gone and die swans came to their senses, diey saw diat die 
geese had risen and flown over to die odier end of die bay. 



THE NEW WATCH-DOG 

There was this at least to be said in the swans' favour— when 
diey saw diat die wild geese had escaped, diey were too proud to 
chase diem. Moreover, the geese could stand on a clump of reeds 
widi perfect composure, and sleep. 

Nils Holgersson was too hungry to sleep. 

"It is necessary for me to get something to eat," he said. 

At diat time, when all kinds of tilings were floating on the 
water, it was not difficult for a little boy like Nils Holgersson to 
find a craft. He did not stop to deliberate, but hopped down on a 
stump that had drifted in amongst die reeds. Then he picked up a 
littie stick and began to pole toward shore. 

Just as he was landing, he heard a splash in the water. He 
stopped short. First he saw a lady swan asleep in her big nest quite 
close to him, dien he noticed diat a fox had taken a few steps into 
the water and was sneaking up to die swan's nest. 

"Hi, hi, hi! Get up, get up!" cried the boy, beating the water 
with his stick. 

The lady swan rose, but not so quickly but diat die fox could 
have pounced upon her had he cared to. However, he refrained 
and instead hurried straight toward die boy. 

Thumbietot saw die fox coming and ran for his life. 

Wide stretches of meadow land spread before him. He saw no 
tree diat he could climb, no hole where he might hide; he just had 
to keep running. 

The boy was a good runner, but it stands to reason diat he 
could not race with a fox! 

Not far from the bay there were a number of littie cabins, with 
candle lights shining through die windows. Naturally die boy ran 
in diat direction, but he realized diat long before he could reach 
the nearest cabin the fox would catch up to him. 

Once die fox was so close that it looked as if die boy would 
surely be his prey, but Nils quickly sprang aside and turned back 
toward die bay. By diat move die fox lost time, and before he 
could reach die boy die latter had run up to two men who were on 
their way home from work. 

The men were tired and sleepy; diey had noticed neidier boy 
nor fox, although both had been running right in front of diem. 
Nor did die boy ask help of die men; he was content to walk close 
beside them. 



"Surely the fox won't venture to come up to the men," he 
thought. 

But presently the fox came pattering along. He probably 
counted on the men taking him for a dog, for he went straight up 
to diem. 

"Whose dog can diat he sneaking around here?" queried one. 
"He looks as diough he were ready to hite." 

The odier paused and glanced hack. 

"Go along widr you!" he said, and gave die fox a kick diat sent 
it to die opposite side die road. "What are you doing here?" 

After diat die fox kept at a safe distance, hut followed all die 
while. 

Presendy die men reached a cahin and entered it. The hoy 
intended to go in widi diem; hut when he got to die stoop he saw a 
hig, shaggy watch-dog rush out from his kennel to greet his master. 
Suddenly die hoy changed his mind and remained out in die 
open. 

"Listen, watch-dog!" whispered the boy as soon as die men 
had shut die door. "I wonder if you would like to help me catch a 
fox to-night?" 

The dog had poor eyesight and had become irritable and 
cranky from being chained. 

"What, I catch a fox?" he barked angrily. "Who are you diat 
makes fun of me? You just come widiin my reach and I'll teach 
you not to fool with me!" 

"You needn't diink diat I'm afraid to come near you!" said die 
boy, running up to die dog. 

When die dog saw him he was so astonished diat he could not 
speak. 

"I'm die one diey call Thumbietot, who travels with die wild 
geese," said die boy, introducing himself. "Haven't you heard of 
me?" 

"I believe die sparrows have twittered a little about you," die 
dog returned. "They say diat you have done wonderful diings for 
one of your size." 

"I've been radier lucky up to die present," admitted die boy. 
"But now it's all up with me unless you help me! There's a fox at 
my heels. He's lying in wait for me around die comer." 

"Don't you suppose I can smell him?" retorted die dog. "But 
we'll soon be rid of him!" Widi diat die dog sprang as far as die 
chain would allow, barking and growling for ever so long. "Now I 
don't diink he will show his face again to-night!" said die dog. 

"It will take somediing besides a fine bark to scare diat fox!" 
die boy remarked. "He'll soon be here again, and diat is precisely 
what I wish, for I have set my heart on your catching him." 

"Are you poking fun at me now?" asked die dog. 

"Only come with me into your kennel, and I'll tell you what to 



do." 

The boy and die watch-dog crept into die kennel and 
crouched diere, whispering. 

By and by die fox stuck his nose out from his hiding place. 
When all was quiet he crept along cautiously. He scented die boy 
all die way to die kennel, but halted at a safe distance and sat down 
to tiiink of some way to coax him out. 

Suddenly die watch-dog poked his head out and growled at 
him: 

"Go away, or I'll catch you!" 

"I'll sit here as long as I please for all of you!" defied die fox. 

"Go.away!" repeated die dog direateningly, "or diere will be 
no more hunting for you after to-night." 

But die fox only grinned and did not move an inch. 

"I know how far your chain can reach," he said. 

"I have warned you twice," said die dog, coming out from his 
kennel. "Now blame yourself!" 

Widi diat die dog sprang at die fox and caught him widiout the 
least effort, for he was loose. The boy had unbuckled his collar. 

There was a hot struggle, but it was soon over. The dog was 
die victor. The fox lay on die ground and dared not move. 

"Don't stir or I'll kill you!" snarled die dog. Then he took die 
fox by die scruff of die neck and dragged him to die kennel. 
There die boy was ready with die chain. He placed die dog collar 
around die neck of die fox, tightening it so diat he was securely 
chained. During all diis die fox had to lie still, for he was afraid to 
move. 

"Now, Smirre Fox, I hope you'll make a good watchdog," 
laughed die boy when he had finished. 



VI 
DUNFIN 

THE CITY THAT FLOATS ON THE WATER 

Friday, May sixth 

NO ONF could be more gende and kind dian die littie gray goose 
Dunfin. Afl die wild geese loved her, and die tame white goosey- 
gander would have died for her. When Dunfin asked for anything 
not even Akka could say no. 

As soon as Dunfin came to Lake Malar die landscape looked 
familiar to her. Just beyond die lake lay the sea, with many 
wooded islands, and diere, on a littie islet, lived her parents and 



her brothers and sisters. She begged the wild geese to fly to her 
home before traveling farther north, that she might let her family 
see that she was still alive. It would be such a joy to diem. 

Akka frankly declared diat she diought Dunlin's parents and 
brodiers and sisters had shown no great love for her when diey 
abandoned her at Oland, but Dunfin would not admit that Akka 
was in the right. "What else was diere to do, when they saw tiiat I 
could not fly?" she protested. "Surely diey couldn't remain at 
Oland on my account!" 

Dunfin began telling die wild geese all about her home in die 
archipelago, to try to induce them to make die trip. Her family 
lived on a rock island. Seen from a distance, diere appeared to be 
nothing but stone diere; but when one came closer, diere were to 
be found die choicest goose tidbits in clefts and hollows, and one 
might search long for better nesting places dian those tiiat were 
hidden in die mountain crevices or among die osier bushes. But 
die best of all was the old fisherman who lived diere. Dunfin had 
heard diat in his youdi he had been a great shot and had always 
lain in die offing and hunted birds. But now, in his old age— since 
his wife had died and die children had gone from home, so diat 
he was alone in die hut— he had begun to care for die birds on his 
island. He never fired a shot at diem, nor would he permit odiers 
to do so. He walked around amongst die birds' nests, and when 
die modier birds were sitting he brought diem food. Not one was 
afraid of him. They all loved him. 

Dunfin had been in his hut many times, and he had fed her 
with bread crumbs. Because he was kind to die birds, diey flocked 
to his island in such great numbers that it was becoming 
overcrowded. If one happened to arrive a littie late in die spring, 
all die nesting places were occupied. That was why Dunfin's family 
had been obliged to leave her. 

Dunfin begged so hard that she finally had her way, aldiough 
die wild geese felt diat diey were losing time and really should be 
going straight nordi. But a littie trip like diis to the cliff island 
would not delay diem more dian a day. 

So diey started off one morning, after fortifying diemselves 
with a good breakfast, and flew eastward over Lake Malar. The 
boy did not know for certain where diey were going; but he 
noticed diat die fartiier east diey flew, die livelier it was on die lake 
and die more built up were die shores. 

Heavily freighted barges and sloops, boats and fishing smacks 
were on dieir way east, and diese were met and passed by many 
pretty white steamers. Along die shores ran country roads and 
railway tracks— all in die same direction. There was some place 
beyond in die east where all wished to go to in die morning. 

On one of die islands die boy saw a big, white castie, and to 
die east of it die shores were dotted with villas. At die start diese 



la)' far apart, then they became closer and closer, and, presendy, 
die whole shore was lined widi diem. They were of every variety— 
here a casde, diere a cottage; dien a low manor house appeared, 
or a mansion, widi many small towers. Some stood in gardens, but 
most of diem were in die wild woods which bordered die shores. 
Despite dieir dissimilarity, diey had one point of resemblance— 
they were not plain and sombre -looking, like other buildings, but 
were gaudily painted in striking greens and blues, reds and white, 
like children's playhouses. 

As die boy sat on die goose's back and glanced down at die 
curious shore mansions, Dunfin cried out widi delight: "Now I 
know where I am! Over diere lies die City diat Floats on die 
Water." 

The boy looked ahead. At first he saw nodiing but some light 
clouds and mists rolling forward over die water, but soon he 
caught sight of some tall spires, and dien one and anodier house 
widi many rows of windows. They appeared and disappeared— 
rolling hidier and thidier— but not a strip of shore did he see! 
Everything over diere appeared to be resting on die water. 

Nearer to die city he saw no more pretty playhouses along die 
shores— only dingy factories. Great heaps of coal and wood were 
stacked behind tall planks, and alongside black, sooty docks lay 
bulky freight steamers; but over all was spread a shimmering, 
transparent mist, which made everything appear so big and strong 
and wonderful diat it was almost beautiful. 

The wild geese flew past factories and freight steamers and 
were nearing die cloud-enveloped spires. Suddenly all die mists 
sank to die water, save die diin, fleecy ones diat circled above dieir 
heads, beautifully tinted in blues and pinks. The odier clouds 
rolled over water and land. They entirely obscured die lower 
portions of die houses: only die upper stories and the roofs and 
gables were visible. Some of die buildings appeared to be as high 
as the Tower of Babel. The boy no doubt knew diat diey were 
built upon hills and mountains, but these he did not see— only die 
houses diat seemed to float among die white, drifting clouds. In 
reality die buildings were dark and ding}?, for die sun in die east 
was not shining on diem. 

The boy knew diat he was riding above a large city, for he saw 
spires and house roofs rising from die clouds in every direction. 
Sometimes an opening was made in die circling mists, and he 
looked down into a running, tortuous stream; but no land could 
he see. All diis was beautiful to look upon, but he felt quite 
distraught— as one does when happening upon something one 
cannot understand. 

When he had gone beyond die city, he found that die ground 
was no longer hidden by clouds, but diat shores, streams, and 
islands were again plainly visible. He turned to see the city better, 



but could not, for now it looked quite enchanted. The mists had 
taken on colour from the sunshine and were rolling forward in die 
most brilliant reds, blues, and yellows. The houses were white, as 
if built of light, and die windows and spires sparkled like lire. All 
things floated on die water as before. 

The geese were traveling straight east. They flew over factories 
and workshops; dien over mansions edging die shores. 
Steamboats and tugs swarmed on die water; but now diey came 
from die east and were steaming westward toward the city. 

The wild geese flew on, but instead of die narrow Malar fiords 
and die litde islands, broader waters and larger islands spread 
under diem. At last die land was left behind and seen no more. 

They flew still farther out, where they found no more large 
inhabited islands— only numberless little rock islands were 
scattered on die water. Now die fiords were not crowded by die 
land. The sea lay before diem, vast and limitless. 

Here die wild geese alighted on a cliff island, and as soon as 
their feet touched die ground die boy turned to Dunfin. 

"What city did we fly over just now?" he asked. 

"I don't know what human beings have named it," said 
Dunfin. "We gray geese call it die 'City diat Floats on die Water'." 



THE SISTERS 

Dunfin had two sisters, Prettywing and Goldeye. They were 
strong and intelligent birds, but they did not have such a soft and 
shiny feadier dress as Dunfin, nor did diey have her sweet and 
gentie disposition. From die time diey had been litde, yellow 
goslings, dieir parents and relatives and even die old fisherman 
had plainly shown diem that diey diought more of Dunfin dian of 
diem. Therefore die sisters had always hated her. 

When die wild geese landed on die cliff island, Prettywing and 
Goldeye were feeding on a bit of grass close to die strand, and 
immediately caught sight of die strangers. 

"See, Sister Goldeye, what fine -looking geese have come to 
our island!" exclaimed Prettywing. "I have rarely seen such 
graceful birds. Do you notice diat diey have a white goosey-gander 
among diem? Did you ever set eyes on a handsomer bird? One 
could almost take him for a swan!" 

Goldeye agreed with her sister diat diese were certainly very 
distinguished strangers diat had come to die island, but suddenly 
she broke off and called: "Sister Prettywing! Oh, Sister Prettywing! 
Don't you see whom diey bring with diem?" 

Prettywing also caught sight of Dunfin and was so astounded 
diat she stood for a long time with her bill wide open, and only 
hissed. 



"It can't be possible that it is she! How did she manage to get 
in widi people of diat class? Why, we left her at Oland to freeze 
and starve." 

"The worst of it is she will tatde to fadier and modier diat we 
flew so close to her diat we knocked her wing out of joint," said 
Goldeye. "You'll see diat it will end in our being driven from die 
island!" 

"We have nothing but trouble in store for us, now diat diat 
young one has come back!" snapped Prettywing. "Still I diink it 
would be best for us to appear as pleased as possible over her 
return. She is so stupid that perhaps she didn't even notice that we 
gave her a push on purpose." 

While Prettywing and Goldeye were talking in diis strain, die 
wild geese had been standing on die strand, pluming dieir feathers 
after die flight. Now diey marched in a long line up die rocky 
shore to die cleft where Dunfin's parents usually stopped. 

Dunfin's parents were good folk. They had lived on die island 
longer dian anyone else, and it was dieir habit to counsel and aid 
all newcomers. They too had seen the geese approach, but tiiey 
had not recognized Dunfin in die flock. 

"It is strange to see wild geese land on diis island," remarked 
the goose-master. "It is a fine flock— diat one can see by dieir 
flight." 

"But it won't be easy to find pasturage for so many," said die 
goose-wife, who was gende and sweet-tempered, like Dunfin. 

When Akka came marching widi her company, Dunfin's 
parents went out to meet her and welcome her to die island. 
Dunfin flew from her place at die end of die line and lit between 
her parents. 

"Modier and fadier, I'm here at last!" she cried joyously. 
"Don't you know Dunfin?" 

At first die old goose -parents could not quite make out what 
they saw, but when diey recognized Dunfin diey were absurdly 
happy, of course. 

While die wild geese and Morten Goosey-Gander and Dunfin 
were chattering excitedly, dying to tell how she had been rescued, 
Prettywing and Goldeye came running. They cried "welcome" and 
pretended to be so happy because Dunfin was at home diat she 
was deeply moved. 

The wild geese fared well on die island and decided not to 
travel fardier until die following morning. After a while die sisters 
asked Dunfin if she would come widi diem and see the places 
where diey intended to build dieir nests. She promptiy 
accompanied diem, and saw that they had picked out secluded 
and well protected nesting places. 

"Now where will you settie down, Dunfin?" diey asked. 

"I? Why I don't intend to remain on die island," she said. I'm 



going with the wild geese up to Lapland." 

"What a pity that you must leave us!" said the sisters. 

"I should have heen very glad to remain here with father and 
mother and you," said Dunlin, "had I not promised the big, 
white—" 

"What!" shrieked Prettywing. "Are you to have the handsome 
goosey-gander? Then it is—" But here Goldeye gave her a sharp 
nudge, and she stopped short. 

The two cruel sisters had much to talk about all die afternoon. 
They were furious because Dunfin had a suitor like the white 
goosey-gander. They themselves had suitors, but dieirs were only 
common gray geese, and, since they had seen Morten Goosey- 
Gander, diey diought diem so homely and low-bred diat diey did 
not wish even to look at diem. 

"This will grieve me to deadi!" whimpered Goldeye. "If at 
least it had been you, Sister Prettywing, who had captured him!" 

"I would radier see him dead dian to go about here die entire 
summer diinking of Dunfin's capturing a white goosey-gander!" 
pouted Prettywing. 

However, die sisters continued to appear very friendly toward 
Dunfin, and in die afternoon Goldeye took Dunfin with her, that 
she might see die one she thought of marrying. 

"He's not as attractive as the one you will have," said Goldeye. 
"But to make up for it, one can be certain that he is what he is." 

"What do you mean, Goldeye?" questioned Dunfin. At first 
Goldeye would not explain what she had meant, but at last she 
came out with it. 

"We have never seen a white goose travel with wild geese," 
said die sister, "and we wonder if he can be bewitched." 

"You are very stupid," retorted Dunfin indignantly. "He is a 
tame goose, of course." 

"He brings with him one who is bewitched," said Goldeye, 
"and, under die circumstances, he too must be bewitched. Are 
you not afraid that he may be a black cormorant?" She was a good 
talker and succeeded in frightening Dunfin thoroughly. 

"You don't mean what you are saying," pleaded the little gray 
goose. "You only wish to frighten me!" 

"I wish what is for your good, Dunfin," said Goldeye. "I can't 
imagine anything worse than for you to fly away with a black 
cormorant! But now I shall tell you something— try to persuade 
him to eat some of die roots I have gathered here. If he is 
bewitched, it will be apparent at once. If he is not, he will remain 
as he is." 

The boy was sitting amongst die wild geese, listening to Akka 
and die old goose-master, when Dunfin came flying up to him. 
"Thumbietot, Thumbietot!" she cried. "Morten Goosey-Gander is 
dying! I have killed him!" 



"Let me get up on your back, Dunfin, and take me to him!" 
Away they flew, and Akka and the other wild geese followed diem. 
When diey got to the goosey-gander, he was lying prostrate on die 
ground. He could not utter a word— only gasped for breadi. 

"Tickle him under die gorge and slap him on die back!" 
commanded Akka. The boy did so and presendy die big, white 
gander coughed up a large, white root, which had stuck in his 
gorge. "Have you been eating of these?" asked Akka, pointing to 
some roots that lay on die ground. 

"Yes," groaned die goosey-gander. 

"Then it was well diey stuck in your diroat," said Akka, "for 
diey are poisonous. Had you swallowed diem, you certainly 
should have died." 

"Dunfin bade me eat diem," said die goosey-gander. 

"My sister gave diem to me," protested Dunfin, and she told 
everything. 

"You must beware of those sisters of yours, Dunfin!" warned 
Akka, "for they wish you no good, depend upon it!" 

But Dunfin was so constituted diat she could not diink evil of 
any one and, a moment later, when Prettywing asked her to come 
and meet her intended, she went widi her immediately. 

"Oh, he isn't as handsome as yours," said die sister, "but he's 
much more courageous and daring!" 

"How do you know he is?" challenged Dunfin. 

"For some time past there has been weeping and wailing 
amongst die sea gulls and wild ducks on die island. Every morning 
at daybreak a strange bird of prey conies and carries off one of 
diem." 

"What kind of a bird is it?" asked Dunfin. 

"We don't know," replied die sister. "One of his kind has 
never before been seen on the island, and, strange to say, he has 
never attacked one of us geese. But now my intended has made 
up his mind to challenge him to-morrow morning, and drive him 
away." 

"Oh, I hope he'll succeed!" said Dunfin. 

"I hardly diink he will," returned die sister. "If my goosey- 
gander was as big and strong as yours, I should have some hope." 

"Do you wish me to ask Morten Goosey-Gander to meet die 
strange bird?" asked Dunfin. 

"Indeed, I do!" exclaimed Prettywing excitedly. "You couldn't 
render me a greater service." 

The next morning die goosey-gander was up before die sun. 
He stationed himself on die highest point of die island and peered 
in all directions. Presently he saw a big, dark bird coming from die 
west. His wings were exceedingly large, and it was easy to tell diat 
he was an eagle. The goosey-gander had not expected a more 
dangerous adversary dian an owl, and now he understood diat he 



could not escape this encounter with his life. But it did not occur 
to him to avoid a struggle with a hird who was many times stronger 
dian himself. 

The great hird swooped down on a sea gull and dug his talons 
into it. Before die eagle could spread his wings, Morten Goosey- 
Gander rushed up to him. 

"Drop drat!" he shouted, "and don't come here again or you'll 
have me to deal with!" 

"What kind of a lunatic are you?" said tire eagle. "It's lucky for 
you drat I never fight widi geese, or you would soon he done for!" 

Morten Goosey-Gander diought die eagle considered himself 
too good to fight widi him and flew at him, incensed, hiting him 
on die throat and heating him with his wings. This, naturally, the 
eagle would not tolerate and he hegan to fight, hut not widi his full 
strengdi. 

The hoy lay sleeping in die quarters where Akka and die odier 
wild geese slept, when Dunfin called: "Thumhietot, Thumbietot! 
Morten Goosey-Gander is being torn to pieces by an eagle." 

"Let me get up on your back, Dunfin, and take me to him!" 
said die boy. 

When diey arrived on die scene Morten Goosey-Gander was 
badly torn, and bleeding, but he was still fighting. The boy could 
not battle with die eagle; all that he could do was to seek more 
efficient help. 

"Hurry, Dunfin, and call Akka and die wild geese!" he cried. 
The instant he said diat, die eagle flew back and stopped fighting. 

"Who's speaking of Akka?" he asked. He saw Thumbietot 
and heard die wild geese honking, so he spread his wings. 

"Tell Akka I never expected to ran across her or any of her 
flock out here in die sea!" he said, and soared away in a rapid and 
graceful flight. 

"That is die self-same eagle who once brought me back to die 
wild geese," die boy remarked, gazing after the bird in 
astonishment. 

The geese had decided to leave die island at dawn, but first 
diey wanted to feed awhile. As diey walked about and nibbled, a 
mountain duck came up to Dunfin. 

"I have a message for you from your sisters," said die duck. 
"They dare not show diemselves among die wild geese, but diey 
asked me to remind you not to leave die island witiiout calling on 
the old fisherman." 

"That's so!" exclaimed Dunfin, but she was so frightened now 
diat she would not go alone, and asked die goosey-gander and 
Thumbietot to accompany her to die hut. 

The door was open, so Dunfin entered, but die odiers 
remained outside. After a moment they heard Akka give the 
signal to start, and called Dunfin. A gray goose came out and flew 



with die wild geese away from die island. 

They had traveled quite a distance along die archipelago when 
die boy began to wonder at die goose who accompanied diem. 
Dunlin always flew lightiy and noiselessly, but this one laboured 
widi heavy and noisy wing-strokes. "We are in the wrong 
company. It is Prettywing diat follows us!" 

The boy had barely spoken when the goose uttered such an 
ugly and angry shriek diat all knew who she was. Akka and die 
otiiers turned to her, but die gray goose did not fly away at once. 
Instead she bumped against die big goosey-gander, snatched 
Thumbietot, and flew off widi him in her bill. 

There was a wild chase over die archipelago. Prettywing flew 
fast, but die wild geese were close behind her, and diere was no 
chance for her to escape. 

Suddenly they saw a puff of smoke rise up from die sea, and 
heard an explosion. In dieir excitement diey had not noticed diat 
diey were direcdy above a boat in which a lone fisherman was 
seated. 

However, none of die geese was hurt; but just tiiere, above die 
boat, Prettywing opened her bill and dropped Thumbietot into 
die sea. 



VII 
STOCKHOLM 

SKANSEN 

A FEW years ago, at Skansen— the great park just outside of 
Stockholm where diey have collected so many wonderful things- 
there lived a little old man, named Clement Larsson. He was from 
Halsingland and had come to Skansen widi his fiddle to play folk 
dances and odier old melodies. As a performer, he appeared 
mostiy in die evening. During die day it was his business to sit on 
guard in one of die many pretty peasant cottages which have been 
moved to Skansen from all parts of die country. 

In die beginning Clement diought diat he fared better in his 
old age dian he had ever dared dream; but after a time he began 
to dislike die place terribly, especially while he was on watch duty. 
It was all very well when visitors came into die cottage to look 
around, but some days Clement would sit for many hours all 
alone. Then he felt so homesick diat he feared he would have to 
give up his place. He was very poor and knew diat at home he 
would become a charge on die parish. Therefore he tried to hold 
out as long as he could, aldiough he felt more unhappy from day 



to day. 

One beautiful evening in the beginning of May Clement had 
been granted a few hours' leave of absence. He was on his way 
down die steep hill leading out of Skansen, when he met an island 
fisherman coming along witii his game bag. The fisherman was an 
active young man who came to Skansen with sea-fowl that he had 
managed to capture alive. Clement had met him before, many 
times. 

The fisherman stopped Clement to ask if die superintendent 
at Skansen was at home. When Clement had replied, he, in turn, 
asked what choice tiling the fisherman had in his bag. "You can 
see what I have," the fisherman answered, "if in return you will 
give me an idea as to what I should ask for it." 
He held open the bag and Clement peeped into it once— and 
again— then quickly drew back a step or two. "Good gracious, 
Ashbjorn!" he exclaimed. "How did you catch that one?" 

He remembered that when he was a child his mother used to 
talk of die tiny folk who lived under the cabin floor. He was not 
permitted to cry or to be naughty, lest he provoke these small 
people. After he was grown he believed his mother had made up 
these stories about the elves to make him behave himself. But it 
had been no invention of his mother's, it seemed; for there, in 
Ashbjorn' s bag, lay one of the tiny folk. 

There was a little of the terror natural to childhood left in 
Clement, and he felt a shudder run down his spinal column as he 
peeped into the bag. Ashbjorn saw that he was frightened and 
began to laugh; but Clement took the matter seriously. 

"Tell me, Ashbjorn, where you came across him?" he asked. 

"You may be sure that I wasn't lying in wait for him!" said 
Ashbjorn, "He came to me. I started put early this morning and 
took my rifle along into the boat. I had just poled away from the 
shore when I sighted some wild geese coming from the east, 
shrieking like mad. I sent them a shot, but hit none of them. 
Instead this creature came tumbling down into the water— so close 
to the boat that I only had to put my hand out and pick him up." 

"I hope you didn't shoot him, Ashbjorn?" 

"Oh, no! He is well and sound; but when he came down, he 
was a little dazed at first, so I took advantage of that fact to wind 
the ends of two sail threads around his ankles and wrists, so that 
he couldn't run away. 'Ha! Here's something for Skansen,' I 
thought instantly." 

Clement grew strangely troubled as the fisherman talked. All 
that he had heard about the tiny folk in his childhood— of their 
vindictiveness toward enemies and their benevolence toward 
friends— came back to him. It had never gone well with those who 
had attempted to hold one of them captive. 

"You should have let him go at once, Ashbjorn." said 



Clement. 

"I came precious near being forced to set him free," returned 
die fisherman. "You may as well know, Clement, diat die wild 
geese followed me all die way home, and diey criss-crossed over 
die island die whole morning, honk-honking as if diey wanted him 
back. Not only diey, but die entire population— sea gulls, sea 
swallows, and many odiers who are not worth a shot of powder, 
alighted on die island and made an awful racket. When I came 
out diey fluttered about me until I had to turn back. My wife 
begged me to let him go, but I had made up my mind diat he 
should come here to Skansen, so I placed one of the children's 
dolls in die window, hid die midget in die bottom of my bag, and 
started away. The birds must have fancied diat it was he who stood 
in die window, for diey permitted me to leave widiout pursuing 
me." 

"Does it say anydiing?" asked Clement. 

"Yes. At first he tried to call to die birds, but I wouldn't have it 
and put a gag in his moudi." 

"Oh, Ashbjorn!" protested Clement. "How can you treat him 
so! Don't you see diat he is somediing supernatural!" 

"I don't know what he is," said Ashbjorn calmly. "Let odiers 
consider diat. I'm satisfied if only I can get a good sum for him. 
Now tell me, Clement, what you diink die doctor at Skansen 
would give me." 

There was a long pause before Clement replied. He felt very 
sorry for die poor littie chap. He actually imagined diat his mother 
was standing beside him telling him diat he must always be kind to 
die tiny folk. 

"I have no idea what die doctor up diere would care to give 
you, Ashbjorn," he said finally. "But if you will leave him widi me, 
I'll pay you twenty kroner for him." 

Ashbjorn stared at die fiddler in amazement when he heard 
him name so large a sum. He diought diat Clement believed die 
midget had some mysterious power and might be of service to 
him. He was by no means certain diat die doctor would think him 
such a great find or would offer to pay so high a sum for him; so 
he accepted Clement's proffer. 

The fiddler poked his purchase into one of his wide pockets, 
turned back to Skansen, and went into a moss-covered hut, where 
diere were neidier visitors nor guards. He closed die door after 
him, took out die midget, who was still bound hand and foot and 
gagged, and laid him down gentiy on a bench. 

"Now listen to what I say!" said Clement. "I know of course 
diat such as you do not like to be seen of men, but prefer to go 
about and busy yourselves in your own way. Therefore I have 
decided to give you your liberty— but only on condition diat you 
will remain in diis park until I permit you to leave. If you agree to 



this, nod your head diree times." Clement gazed at die midget 
widi confident expectation, but die latter did not move a muscle. 

"You shall not fare badly," continued Clement. "I'll see to it 
diat you are fed every day, and you will have so much to do here 
diat die time will not seem long to you. But you mustn't go 
elsewhere till I give you leave. Now we'll agree as to a signal. So 
long as I set your food out in a white bowl you are to stay. When I 
set it out in a blue one you may go." 

Clement paused again, expecting die midget to give die sign of 
approval, but he did not stir. 

"Very well," said Clement, "dien diere's no choice but to show 
you to the master of diis place. Then you'll be put in a glass case, 
and all die people in die big city of Stockholm will come and stare 
at you." 

This scared die midget, and he promptly gave die signal. 

"That was right," said Clement as he cut die cord diat bound 
die midget's hands. Then he hurried toward the door. 

The boy unloosed die bands around his ankles and tore away 
the gag before thinking of anydiing else. When he turned to 
Clement to diank him, he had gone. 

Just outside die door Clement met a handsome, noble -looking 
gendeman, who was on his way to a place close by from which 
diere was a beautiful outlook. Clement could not recall having 
seen die stately old man before, but die latter must surely have 
noticed Clement sometime when he was playing die fiddle, 
because he stopped and spoke to him. 

"Good day, Clement!" he said. "How do you do? You are not 
ill, are you? I diink you have grown a bit diin of late." 

There was such an expression of kindliness about die old 
gendeman diat Clement plucked up courage and told him of his 
homesickness. 

"What!" exclaimed die old gendeman. "Are you homesick 
when you are in Stockholm? It can't be possible!" He looked 
almost offended. Then he reflected diat it was only an ignorant 
old peasant from Halsingland diat he talked widi— and so resumed 
his friendly attitude. 

"Surely you have never heard how die city of Stockholm was 
founded? If you had, you would comprehend diat your anxiety to 
get away is only a foolish fancy. Come widi me to die bench over 
yonder and I will tell you some tiling about Stockholm." 

When die old gendeman was seated on die bench he glanced 
down at die city, which spread in all its glory below him, and he 
drew a deep breath, as if he wished to drink in all the beauty of die 
landscape. Thereupon he turned to die fiddler. 
"Look, Clement!" he said, and as he talked he traced widi his cane 
a litde map in die sand in front of diem. "Here lies Uppland, and 



here, to die south, a point juts out, which is split up by a number 
of bays. And here we have Sormland widi another point, which is 
just as cut up and points straight north. Here, from tire west, 
comes a lake filled with islands: It is Lake Malar. From tire east 
comes another body of water, which can barely squeeze in 
between tire islands and islets. It is die East Sea. Here, Clement, 
where Uppland joins Sormland and Malaren joins die East Sea, 
conies a short river, in the centre of which die four littie islets diat 
divide die river into several tributaries— one of which is called 
Norrstrom but was formerly Stocksund. 

"In die beginning diese islets were common wooded islands, 
such as one finds in plenty on Lake Malar even to-day, and for 
ages diey were entirely uninhabited. They were well located 
between two bodies of water and two bodies of land; but diis no 
one remarked. Year after year passed; people setded along Lake 
Malar and in die archipelago, but diese river islands attracted no 
settiers. Sometimes it happened diat a seafarer put into port at one 
of diem and pitched his tent for die night; but no one remained 
diere long. 

"One day a fisherman, who lived on Liding Island, out in Salt 
Fiord, steered his boat toward Lake Malar, where he had such 
good luck widi his fishing diat he forgot to start for home in time. 
He got no fardier dian die four islets, and die best he could do 
was to land on one and wait until later in die night, when diere 
would be bright moonlight. 

"It was late summer and warm. The fisherman hauled his boat 
on land, lay down beside it, his head resting upon a stone, and fell 
asleep. When he awoke die moon had been up a long while. It 
hung right above him and shone with such splendour diat it was 
like broad daylight. 

"The man jumped to his feet and was about to push his boat 
into die water, when he saw a lot of black specks moving out in the 
stream. A school of seals was heading full speed for die island. 
When die fisherman saw that they intended to crawl up on land, 
he bent down for his spear, which he always took with him in die 
boat. But when he straightened up, he saw no seals. Instead, diere 
stood on die strand die most beautiful young maidens, dressed in 
green, trailing satin robes, widi pearl crowns upon dieir heads. 
The fisherman understood diat diese were mermaids who lived 
on desolate rock islands far out at sea and had assumed seal 
disguises in order to come up on land and enjoy die moonlight on 
die green islets. 

"He laid down the spear very cautiously, and when die young 
maidens came up on die island to play, he stole behind and 
surveyed diem. He had heard diat sea-nymphs were so beautiful 
and fascinating that no one could see diem and not be enchanted 
by dieir charms; and he had to admit diat this was not too much to 



say of them. 

"When he had stood for a while under die shadow of die trees 
and watched the dance, he went down to die strand, took one of 
the seal skins lying diere, and hid it under a stone. Then he went 
hack to his hoat, lay down beside it, and pretended to be asleep. 

"Presendy he saw die young maidens trip down to die strand 
to don dieir seal skins. At first all was play and laughter, which was 
changed to weeping and wailing when one of the mermaids could 
not find her seal robe. Her companions ran up and down the 
strand and helped her search for it, but no trace could diey find. 
While diey were seeking diey noticed diat die sky was growing 
pale and die day was breaking, so diey could tarry no longer, and 
diey all swam away, leaving behind the one whose seal skin was 
missing. She sat on die strand and wept. 

"The fisherman felt sorry for her, of course, but he forced 
himself to lie still till daybreak. Then he got up, pushed the boat 
into die water, and stepped into it to make it appear diat he saw 
her by chance after he had lifted the oars. 

"'Who are you?' he called out. 'Are you shipwrecked?' 

"She ran toward him and asked if he had seen her seal skin. 
The fisherman looked as if he did not know what she was talking 
about. She sat down again and wept. Then he determined to take 
her widi him in die boat. 'Come widi me to my cottage,' he 
commanded, 'and my modier will take care of you. You can't stay 
here on die island, where you have neidier food nor shelter!' He 
talked so convincingly diat she was persuaded to step into his boat. 

"Both the fisherman and his modier were very kind to die 
poor mermaid, and she seemed to be happy widi diem. She grew 
more contented every day and helped die older woman widi her 
work, and was exacdy like any odier island lass— only she was 
much prettier. One day die fisherman asked her if she would be 
his wife, and she did not object, but at once said yes. 

"Preparations were made for die wedding. The mermaid 
dressed as a bride in her green, trailing robe widi die shimmering 
pearl crown she had worn when die fisherman first saw her. There 
was neidier church nor parson on die island at diat time, so die 
bridal party seated diemselves in the boats to row up to the first 
church diey should find. 

"The fisherman had die mermaid and his modier in his boat, 
and he rowed so well diat he was far ahead of all die odiers. When 
he had come so far diat he could see die islet in the river, where 
he won his bride, he could not help smiling. 

'"What are you smiling at?' she asked. 

'"Oh, I'm diinking of diat night when I hid your seal skin,' 
answered die fisherman; for he felt so sure of her diat he diought 
diere was no longer any need for him to conceal anydiing. 

'"What are you saying?' asked die bride, astonished. 'Surely I 



have never possessed a seal skin!' It appeared she had forgotten 
everydiing. 

'"Don't you recollect how you danced with die mermaids?' he 
asked. 

'"I don't know what you mean,' said die hride. 'I diink diat 
you must have dreamed a strange dream last night.' 

'"If I show you your seal skin, you'll probably believe me!' 
laughed the fisherman, prompdy turning die boat toward die islet. 
They stepped ashore and he brought die seal skin out from under 
die stone where he had hidden it. 

"But die instant die bride set eyes on die seal skin she grasped 
it and drew it over her head. It snuggled close to her— as if diere 
was life in it— and immediately she direw herself into die stream. 

"The bridegroom saw her swim away and plunged into the 
water after her; but he could not catch up to her. When he saw 
diat he couldn't stop her in any odier way, in his despair, he seized 
his spear and hurled it. He aimed better dian he had intended, for 
die poor mermaid gave a piercing shriek and disappeared in die 
depdis. 

"The fisherman stood on die strand waiting for her to appear 
again. He observed that die water around him began to take on a 
soft sheen, a beauty that he had never before seen. It shimmered 
in pink and white, like die colour-play on die inside of sea shells. 

"As die glittering water lapped die shores, die fisherman 
thought that they too were transformed. They began to blossom 
and waft their perfumes. A soft sheen spread over them and they 
also took on a beauty which diey had never possessed before. 

"He understood how all this had come to pass. For it is thus 
with mermaids: one who beholds diem must needs find diem 
more beautiful dian any one else, and die mermaid's blood being 
mixed with die water that badied die shores, her beauty was 
transferred to bodi. All who saw diem must love diem and yearn 
for diem. This was dieir legacy from die mermaid." 

When die stately old gendeman had got dius far in his 
narrative he turned to Clement and looked at him. Clement 
nodded reverendy but made no comment, as he did not wish to 
cause a break in die story. 

"Now you must bear this in mind, Clement," die old 
gendeman continued, with a roguish glint in his eyes. "From diat 
time on people emigrated to die islands. At first only fishermen 
and peasants settied diere, but odiers, too, were attracted to diem. 
One day die king and his earl sailed up die stream. They started at 
once to talk of diese islands, having observed diey were so situated 
diat every vessel diat sailed toward Lake Malar had to pass diem. 
The earl suggested diat diere ought to be a lock put on die 
channel which could be opened or closed at will, to let in 
merchant vessels and shut out pirates. 



"This idea was carried out," said tire old gentleman, as he rose 
and hegan to trace in tire sand again with his cane. "On tire largest 
of these islands tire earl erected a fortress with a strong tower, 
which was called 'Karnair.' And around tire island a wall was huilt. 
Here, at tire north and south ends of tire wall, they nrade gates and 
placed strong towers over them. Across the other islands they huilt 
bridges; these were likewise equipped with high towers. Out in tire 
water, round about, they put a wreath of piles with bars that could 
open and close, so that no vessel could sail past without 
pernrission. 

"Therefore you see, Clement, tire four islands which had lain 
so long unnoticed were soon strongly fortified. But this was not all, 
for tire shores and tire sound tenrpted people, and before long 
they came from all quarters to settle there. They built a church, 
which has since been called ' ' Storkyrkan.' Here it stands, near tire 
castle. And here, within tire walls, were tire little huts tire pioneers 
built for themselves. They were primitive, but they served their 
purpose. More was not needed at that time to nrake tire place pass 
for a city. And the city was named Stockholm. 

"There canre a day, Clement, when tire earl who had begun 
the work went to his final rest, and Stockholm was without a 
nraster builder. Monks called tire Gray Friars came to tire country. 
Stockholm attracted them. They asked pernrission to erect a 
monastery there, so tire king gave them an island— one of tire 
smaller ones— this one facing Lake Malar. There they built, and 
the place was called Gray Friars' Island. Other monks canre, 
called tire Black Friars. They, too, asked for right to build in 
Stockholm, near tire south gate. On this, the larger of tire islands 
north of tire city, a 'Holy Ghost House,' or hospital, was built; 
while on tire smaller one thrifty men put up a mill, and along tire 
little islands close by tire monks fished. As you know, there is only 
one island now, for tire canal between tire two has filled up; but it 
is still called Holy Ghost Island. 

"And now, Clenrent, all the little wooded islands were dotted 
with houses, but still people kept streaming in; for these shores 
and waters have the power to draw people to them. Hither canre 
pious women of tire Order of Saint Clara and asked for ground to 
build upon. For them there was no choice but to settle on tire 
north shore, at Norrnralnr, as it is called. You may be sure that 
they were not over pleased with this location, for across Norrnralnr 
ran a high ridge, and on that tire city had its gallows hill, so that it 
was a detested spot. Nevertheless the Clara Sisters erected their 
church and their convent on tire strand below tire ridge. After they 
were established there they soon found plenty of followers. Upon 
tire ridge itself were built a hospital and a church, consecrated to 
Saint Goran, and just below tire ridge a church was erected to 
Saint Jacob. 



"And even at Sodermalm, where die mountain rises 
perpendicularly from die strand, diey began to build. There diey 
raised a church to Saint Mary. 

"But you must not diink diat only cloister folk moved to 
Stockholm! There were also many others— principally German 
tradesmen and artisans. These were more skilled dian die Swedes, 
and were well received. They setded within die walls of die city 
where diey pulled down die wretched littie cabins diat stood diere 
and built high, magnificent stone houses. But space was not 
plentiful widiin die walls, dierefore diey had to build the houses 
close togedier, widi gables facing die narrow by-lanes. So you see, 
Clement, diat Stockholm could attract people!" 

At diis point in die narrative anodier gentleman appeared and 
walked rapidly down die padi toward die man who was talking to 
Clement, but he waved his hand, and die odier remained at a 
distance. The dignified old gendeman still sat on die bench beside 
die fiddler. 

"Now, Clement, you must render me a sendee," he said. "I 
have no time to talk more widi you, but I will send you a book 
about Stockholm and you must read it from cover to cover. I 
have, so to speak, laid die foundations of Stockholm for you. 
Study die rest out for yourself and learn how die city has dirived 
and changed. Read how die littie, narrow, wall-enclosed city on die 
islands has spread into this great sea of houses below us. Read 
how, on die spot where die dark tower Karnan once stood, the 
beautiful, light castle below us was erected and how die Gray 
Friars' church has been turned into die burial place of die Swedish 
kings; read how islet after islet was built up widi factories; how die 
ridge was lowered and die sound filled in; how die truck gardens 
at die soudi and north, ends of the city have been converted into 
beautiful parks or built up quarters; how die King's private deer 
park has become die people's favourite pleasure resort. You must 
make yourself at home here, Clement. This city does not belong 
exclusively to the Stockliolmers. It belongs to you and to all 
Swedes. 

"As you read about Stockholm, remember diat I have spoken 
die trudi, for die city has the power to draw every one to it. First 
die King moved here, dien die nobles built tiieir palaces here, and 
dien one after anodier was attracted to die place, so diat now, as 
you see, Stockholm is not a city unto itself or for nearby districts; it 
has grown into a city for-die whole kingdom. 

"You know, Clement, diat diere are judicial courts in every 
parish throughout die land, but in Stockholm diey have 
jurisdiction for die whole nation. You know diat diere are judges 
in every district court in the country, but at Stockholm diere is 
only one court, to which all die odiers are accountable. You know 
diat diere are barracks and troops in every part of die land, but 



those at Stockholm command die whole army. Everywhere in die 
country you will find railroads, hut die whole great national system 
is controlled and managed at Stockholm; here you will find die 
governing hoards for the clergy, for teachers, for physicians, for 
bailiffs and jurors. This is die heart of your country, Clement. All 
die change you have in your pocket is coined here, and die 
postage stamps you stick on your letters are made here. There is 
something here for every Swede. Here no one need feel 
homesick, for here all Swedes are at home. 

"And when you read of all diat has been brought here to 
Stockholm, diink too of the latest that die city has attracted to 
itself: diese old-time peasant cottages here at Skansen; die old 
dances; die old costumes and house -furnishings; die musicians 
and story-tellers. Everything good of die old times Stockholm has 
tempted here to Skansen to do it honour, diat it may, in turn, 
stand before die people widi renewed glory. 

"But, first and last, remember as you read about Stockholm 
diat you are to sit in this place. You must see how die waves 
sparkle in joyous play and how die shores shimmer widi beauty. 
You will come under die spell of dieir witchery, Clement." 

The handsome old gendeman had raised his voice, so diat it 
rang out strong and commanding, and his eyes shone. Then he 
rose, and, widi a wave of his hand to Clement, walked away. 
Clement understood diat die one who had been talking to him 
was a great man, and he bowed to him as low as he could. 

The next day came a royal lackey widi a big red book and a 
letter for Clement, and in die letter it said diat die book was from 
die King. 

After diat the little old man, Clement Larsson, was light- 
headed for several days, and it was impossible to get a sensible 
word out of him. When a week had gone by, he went to die 
superintendent and gave in his notice. He simply had to go home. 

"Why must you go home? Can't you learn to be content 
here?" asked die doctor. 

"Oh, I'm contented here," said Clement. "That matter 
troubles me no longer, but I must go home all die same." 

Clement was quite perturbed because die King had said diat 
he should learn all about Stockholm and be happy diere. But he 
could not rest until he had told every one at home diat die King 
had said diose words to him. He could not renounce die idea of 
standing on the church knoll at home and telling high and low that 
die King had been so kind to him, diat he had sat beside him on 
die bench, and had sent him a book, and had taken die time to 
talk to him— a poor fiddler— for a whole hour, in order to cure him 
of his homesickness. It was good to relate diis to the Laplanders 
and Dalecarlian peasant girls at Skansen, but what was diat 



compared to being able to tell of it at home? 

Even if Clement were to end in the poorhouse, it wouldn't be 
so hard after diis. He was a totally different man from what he had 
been, and he would be respected and honoured in a very different 
way. 

This new yearning took possession of Clement. He simply had 
to go up to die doctor and say diat he must go home. 



VIII 
GORGO, THE EAGLE 

IN THE MOUNTAIN GLEN 

FAR up among die mountains of Lapland diere was an old eagle's 
nest on a ledge which projected from a high cliff. The nest was 
made of dry twigs of pine and spruce, interlaced one widi another 
until they formed a perfect network. Year by year die nest had 
been repaired and strengthened. It was about two metres wide, 
and nearly as high as a Laplander's hut. 

The cliff on which die eagle's nest was situated towered above 
a big glen, which was inhabited in summer by a flock of wild geese, 
as it was an excellent refuge for diem. It was so secluded between 
cliffs diat not many knew of it, even among the Laplanders 
themselves. 

In die heart of this glen diere was a small, round lake in which 
was an abundance of food for die tiny goslings, and on die tufted 
lake shores which were covered with osier bushes and dwarfed 
birches die geese found fine nesting places. 

In all ages eagles had lived on die mountain, and geese in die 
glen. Every year die former carried off a few of die latter, but diey 
were very careful not to take so many diat die wild geese would be 
afraid to remain in die glen. The geese, in dieir turn, found die 
eagles quite useful. They were robbers, to be sure, but diey kept 
odier robbers away. 

Two years before Nils Holgersson traveled with die wild geese 
the old leader-goose, Akka from Kebnekaise, was standing at die 
foot of die mountain slope looking toward die eagle's nest. 

The eagles were in die habit of starting on dieir chase soon 
after sunrise; during die summers diat Akka had lived in die glen 
she had watched every morning for dieir departure to find if diey 
stopped in the glen to hunt, or if diey flew beyond it to odier 
hunting grounds. 

She did not have to wait long before die two eagles left die 
ledge on die cliff. Stately and terror-striking diey soared into die 



air. They directed their course toward die plain, and Akka 
breathed a sigh of relief. 

The old leader-goose's days of nesting and rearing of young 
were over, and during the summer she passed the time going from 
one goose range to another, giving counsel regarding the brooding 
and care of the young. Aside from this she kept an eye out not 
only for eagles but also for mountain fox and owls and all other 
enemies who were a menace to the wild geese and their young. 

About noontime Akka began to watch for tire eagles again. 
This she had done every day during all tire summers that she had 
lived in the glen. She could tell at once by their flight if their hunt 
had been successful, and in that event she felt relieved for tire 
safety of those who belonged to her. But on this particular day she 
had not seen tire eagles return. "I must be getting old and stupid," 
she drought, when she had waited a time for them. "The eagles 
have probably been home this long while." 

In the afternoon she looked toward tire cliff again, expecting to 
see the eagles perched on the rocky ledge where they usually took 
their afternoon rest; toward evening, when they took their bath in 
the dale lake, she tried again to get sight of them, but failed. Again 
she bemoaned the fact that she was growing old. She was so 
accustomed to having tire eagles on tire mountain above her that 
she could not imagine the possibility of their not having returned. 

The following morning Akka was awake in good season to 
watch for the eagles; but she did not see them. On tire other hand, 
she heard in tire morning stillness a cry that sounded both angry 
and plaintive, and it seemed to come from the eagles' nest. "Can 
there possibly be anything amiss with the eagles?" she wondered. 
She spread her wings quickly, and rose so high that she could 
perfectly well look down into tire nest. 

There she saw neither of the eagles. There was no one in the 
nest save a little half-fledged eaglet who was screaming for food. 

Akka sank down toward tire eagles' nest, slowly and 
reluctantly. It was a gruesome place to come to! It was plain what 
kind of robber folk lived there! In the nest and on the cliff ledge 
lay bleached bones, bloody feathers, pieces of skin, hares' heads, 
birds' beaks, and tire tufted claws of grouse. The eaglet, who was 
lying in die midst of this, was repulsive to look upon, with his big, 
gaping bill, his awkward, down-clad body, and his undeveloped 
wings where tire prospective quills stuck out like thorns. 

At last Akka conquered her repugnance and alighted on the 
edge of tire nest, at tire same time glancing about her anxiously in 
every direction, for each second she expected to see the old eagles 
coming back. 

"It is well that some one has come at last," cried tire baby 
eagle. "Fetch me some food at once!" 

"Well, well, don't be in such haste," said Akka. "Tell me first 



where your father and mother are." 

"That's what I should like to know myself. They went off 
yesterday morning and left me a lemming to live upon while diey 
were away. You can helieve diat was eaten long ago. It's a shame 
for mother to let me starve in this way!" 

Akka hegan to diink that die eagles had really heen shot, and 
she reasoned diat if she were to let the eaglet starve she might 
perhaps he rid of die whole rohher trihe for all time. But it went 
very much against her not to succour a deserted young one so far 
as she could. 

"Why do you sit there and stare?" snapped die eaglet. "Didn't 
you hear me say I want food?" Akka spread her wings and sank 
down to die little lake in die glen. A moment later she returned to 
die eagles' nest widi a salmon trout in her bill. 

The eaglet flew into a temper when she dropped die fish in 
front of him. 

"Do you diink I can eat such stuff?" he shrieked, pushing it 
aside, and trying to strike Akka widi his bill. "Fetch me a willow 
grouse or a lemming, do you hear?" Akka stretched her head 
forward, and gave die eaglet a sharp nip in die neck. "Let me say 
to you," remarked die old goose, "that if I'm to procure food for 
you, you must be satisfied widi what I give you. Your father and 
motiier are dead, and from diem you can get no help; but if you 
want to lie here and starve to deadi while you wait for grouse and 
lemming, I shall not hinder you." 

When Akka had spoken her mind she prompdy retired, and 
did not show her face in die eagles' nest again for some, time. But 
when she did return, die eaglet had eaten die fish, and when she 
dropped anodier in front of him he swallowed it at once, aldiough 
it was plain diat he found it very distasteful. 

Akka had imposed upon herself a tedious task. The old eagles 
never appeared again, and she alone had to procure for die eaglet 
all die food he needed. She gave him fish and frogs and he did not 
seem to fare badly on diis diet, but grew big and strong. He soon 
forgot his parents, die eagles, and fancied diat Akka was his real 
motiier. Akka, in turn, loved him as if he had been her own child. 
She tried to give him a good bringing up, and to cure him of his 
wildness and overbearing ways. 

After a fortnight Akka observed diat die time was approaching 
for her to moult and put on a new featiier dress so as to be ready 
to fly. For a whole moon she would be unable to carry food to die 
baby eaglet, and he might starve to death. 

So Akka said to him one day: "Gorgo, I can't come to you any 
more widi fish. Everything depends now upon your pluck— which 
means can you dare to venture into die glen, so diat I can continue 
to procure food for you? You must choose between starvation and 
flying down to die glen, but diat, too, may cost you your life." 



Without a second's hesitation die eaglet stepped upon the 
edge of die nest. Barely taking die trouble to measure die distance 
to die bottom, he spread his tiny wings and started away. He rolled 
over and over in space, but nevertheless made enough use of his 
wings to reach die ground almost unhurt. 

Down diere in the glen Gorgo passed die summer in company 
with the little goslings, and was a good comrade for diem. Since he 
regarded himself as a gosling, he tried to live as diey lived; when 
diey swam in the lake he followed diem until he came near 
drowning. It was most embarrassing to him diat he could not learn 
to swim, and he went to Akka and complained of his inability. 

"Why can't I swim like die others?" he asked. 

"Your claws grew too hooked, and your toes too large while 
you were up diere on the cliff," Akka replied. "But you'll make a 
fine bird all die same." The eaglet's wings soon grew so large diat 
they could carry him; but not until autumn, when die goslings 
learned to fly, did it dawn upon him diat he could use diem for 
flight. There came a proud time for him, for at this sport he was 
the peer of diem all. His companions never stayed up in die air 
any longer dian diey had to, but he stayed diere nearly die whole 
day, and practised the art of dying. So far it had not occurred to 
him diat he was of another species than die geese, but he could 
not help noting a number of tilings diat surprised him, and he 
questioned Akka constandy. 

"Why do grouse and lemming run and hide when diey see my 
shadow on die cliff?" he queried. "They don't show such fear of 
die odier goslings." 

"Your wings grew too big when you were on die cliff," said 
Akka. "It is diat which frightens die littie wretches. But don't be 
unhappy because of that. You'll be a fine bird all die same." 

After the eagle had learned to fly, he taught himself to fish, 
and to catch frogs. But by and by he began to ponder diis also. 

"How does it happen diat I live on fish and frogs?" he asked. 
"The odier goslings don't." 

"This is due to die fact that I had no odier food to give you 
when you were on die cliff," said Akka. "But don't let that make 
you sad. You'll be a fine bird all die same." 

When die wild geese began dieir autumn moving, Gorgo flew 
along widi die flock, regarding himself all die while as one of 
diem. The air was filled with birds who were on dieir way soudi, 
and diere was great excitement among them when Akka appeared 
with an eagle in her train. The wild goose flock was continually 
surrounded by swarms of die curious who loudly expressed dieir 
astonishment. Akka bade diem be silent, but it w r as impossible to 
stop so many wagging tongues. 

"Why do they call me an eagle?" Gorgo asked repeatedly, 
growing more and more exasperated. "Can't diey see that I'm a 



wild goose? I'm no bird-eater who preys upon his kind. How dare 
diey give me such an ugly name?" 

One day drey flew above a barn yard where many chickens 
walked on a dunrp heap and picked. "Air eagle! An eagle!" 
shrieked die chickens, and started to run for shelter. But Gorgo, 
who had heard dre eagles spoken of as savage crinrinals, could not 
control his anger. He snapped his wings togedrer and shot down to 
die ground, striking his talons into one of die hens. "I'll teach you, 
I will, drat I'nr no eagle!" he screanred furiously, and struck widr 
his beak. 

That instant he heard Akka call to him from dre air, and rose 
obediendy. The wild goose flew toward him and began to 
reprimand him. "What are you trying to do?" she cried, beating 
him with her bill. "Was it perhaps your intention to tear that poor 
hen to pieces?" But when tire eagle took his punishment fronr the 
wild goose without a protest, there arose fronr tire great bird 
throng around them a perfect stornr of taunts and gibes. The eagle 
heard this, and turned toward Akka with flaming eyes, as though 
he would have liked to attack her. But he suddenly changed his 
mind, and with quick wing strokes bounded into tire air, soaring so 
high that no call could reach him; and he sailed around up there 
as long as tire wild geese saw him. 

Two days later he appeared again in tire wild goose flock. 

"I know who I am," he said to Akka. "Since I am an eagle, I 
nrust live as becomes an eagle; but I drink that we can be friends 
all the same. You or any of yours I shall never attack." 

But Akka had set her heart on successfully training air eagle 
into a nrild and harmless bird, and she could not tolerate his 
wanting to do as he chose. 

"Do you drink that I wish to be the friend of a bird-eater?" she 
asked. "Live as I have taught you to live, and you may travel with 
my flock as heretofore." 

Both were proud and stubborn, and neither of them would 
yield. It ended in Akka's forbidding tire eagle to show his face in 
her neighbourhood, and her anger toward him was so intense that 
no one dared speak his name in her presence. 

After tirat Gorgo roanred around tire country, alone and 
shunned, like all great robbers. He was often dowirhearted, and 
certainly longed many a time for tire days wiren he drought himself 
a wild goose, and played with tire merry goslings. 

Among tire animals he had a great reputation for courage. 
They used to say of hinr tirat he feared no one but his foster- 
mother, Akka. And they could also say of hinr tirat he never used 
violence against a wild goose. 



IN CAPTIVITY 

Gorgo was only three years old, and had not as yet thought 
about marrying and procuring a home for himself, when he was 
captured one day by a hunter, and sold to die Skansen Zoological 
Garden, where diere were already two eagles held captive in a cage 
built of iron bars and steel wires. The cage stood out in the open, 
and was so large that a couple of trees had easily been moved into 
it, and quite a large cairn was piled up in there. Notwithstanding all 
this, tire birds were unhappy. They sat motionless on the same 
spot nearly all day. Their pretty, dark feather dresses became 
rough and lustreless, and their eyes were riveted with hopeless 
longing on tire sky without. 

Dining the first week of Gorgo's captivity he was still awake 
and full of life, but later a heavy torpor came upon him. He 
perched himself on one spot, like tire other eagles, and stared at 
vacancy. He no longer knew how the days passed. 

One morning when Gorgo sat in his usual torpor, he heard 
some one call to him from below. He was so drowsy that he could 
barely rouse himself enough to lower his glance. 

"Who is calling me?" he asked. 

"Oh, Gorgo! Don't you know me? It's Thumbietot who used 
to fly around with the wild geese." 

"Is Akka also captured?" asked Gorgo in tire tone of one who 
is trying to collect his thoughts after a long sleep. 

"No; Akka, tire white goosey-gander, and tire whole flock are 
probably safe and sound up in Lapland at this season," said the 
boy. "It's only I who am a prisoner here." 

As tire boy was speaking he noticed that Gorgo averted his 
glance, and began to stare into space again. 

"Golden eagle!" cried the boy; "I have not forgotten that once 
you carried me back to tire wild geese, and that you saved the 
white goosey-gander's life! Tell me if I can be of any help to you!" 

Gorgo scarcely raised his head. "Don't disturb me, 
Thumbietot," he yawned. "I'm sitting here dreaming that I am 
free, and am soaring away up among tire clouds. I don't want to be 
awake." 

"You must rouse yourself, and see what goes on around you," 
die boy admonished, "or you will soon look as wretched as die 
other eagles." 

"I wish I were as they are! They are so lost in their dreams that 
nothing more can trouble them," said tire eagle. 

When night came, and all three eagles were asleep, there was a 
light scraping on the steel wires stretched across the top of the 
cage. The two listless old captives did not allow themselves to be 
disturbed by die noise, but Gorgo awakened. 

"Who's there? Who is moving up on tire roof?" he asked. 



"It's Thumbietot, Gorgo," answered the boy. "I'm sitting here 
filing away at the steel wires so that you can escape." 

The eagle raised his head, and saw in the night light how die 
boy sat and filed die steel wires at die top of die cage. He felt 
hopeful for an instant, but soon discouragement got die upper 
hand. 

"I'm a big bird, Thumbietot," said Gorgo; "how can you ever 
manage to file away enough wires for me to come out? You'd 
better quit diat, and leave me in peace." 

"Oh, go to sleep, and don't bodier about me!" said die boy. 
"I'll not be dirough to-night nor tomorrow night, but I shall try to 
free you in time, for here you'll become a total wreck." 

Gorgo fell asleep. When he awoke die next morning he saw at 
a glance diat a number of wires had been filed. That day he felt 
less drowsy than he had done in the past. He spread his wings, 
and fluttered from branch to branch to get die stiffness out of his 
joints. 

One morning early, just as die first streak of sunlight made its 
appearance, Thumbietot awakened die eagle. 

"Try now, Gorgo!" he whispered. 

The eagle looked up. The boy had actually filed off so many 
wires that now diere was a big hole in die wire netting. Gorgo 
flapped his wings and propelled himself upward. Twice he missed 
and fell back into die cage; but finally succeeded in getting out. 

Widi proud wing strokes he soared into die clouds. Litde 
Thumbietot sat and gazed after him with a mournful expression. 
He wished diat some one would come and give him his freedom 
too. 

The boy was domiciled now at Skansen. He had become 
acquainted with all die animals diere, and had made many friends 
among diem. He had to admit diat diere was so much to see and 
learn diere diat it was not difficult for him to pass die time. To be 
sure his dioughts went fordi every day to Morten Goosey-Gander 
and his odier comrades, and he yearned for diem. "If only I 
weren't bound by my promise," he diought, "I'd find some bird to 
take me to diem!" 

It may seem strange diat Clement Larsson had not restored 
die boy's liberty, but one must remember how excited die little 
fiddler had been when he left Skansen. The morning of his 
departure he had diought of setting out die midget's food in a blue 
bowl, but, unluckily, he had been unable to find one. All die 
Skansen folk— Laps, peasant girls, artisans, and gardeners— had 
come to bid him good-bye, and he had had no time to search for a 
blue bowl. It was time to start, and at the last moment he had to 
ask die old Laplander to help him. 

"One of die tiny folk happens to be living here at Skansen," 
said Clement, "and every morning I set out a litde food for him. 



Will you do me the favour of taking these few coppers and 
purchasing a hlue howl widi diem? Put a litde gruel and milk in it, 
and to-morrow morning set it out under die steps of Bollnas 
cottage." 

The old Laplander looked surprised, hut diere was no time 
for Clement to explain further, as he had to he off to die railway 
station. 

The Laplander went down to the zoological village to purchase 
die bowl. As he saw no blue one that he diought appropriate, he 
bought a white one, and diis he conscientiously filled and set out 
every morning. 

That was why the boy had not been released from his pledge. 
He knew diat Clement had gone away, but he was not allowed to 
leave. 

That night die boy longed more dian ever for his freedom. 
This was because summer had come now in earnest. During his 
travels he had suffered much in cold and stormy weadier, and 
when he first came to Skansen he had diought diat perhaps it was 
just as well diat he had been compelled to break die journey. He 
would have been frozen to deadi had he gone to Lapland in die 
mondi of May. But now it was warm; die eardi was green clad, 
birches and poplars were clodied in dieir satiny foliage, and die 
cherry trees— in fact all die fruit trees— were covered widi blossoms. 
The berry bushes had green berries on their stems; die oaks had 
carefully unfolded dieir leaves, and peas, cabbages, and beans 
were growing in die vegetable garden at Skansen. 

"Now it must be warm up in Lapland," diought die boy. "I 
should like to be seated on Morten Goosey-Gander's back on a 
fine morning like diis! It would be great fun to ride around in die 
warm, still air, and look down at die ground, as it now lies decked 
widi green grass, and embellished widi pretty blossoms." 

He sat musing on diis when die eagle suddenly swooped down 
from die sky, and perched beside die boy, on top of die cage. 

"I wanted to try my wings to see if they were still good for 
anything," said Gorgo. "You didn't suppose diat I meant to leave 
you here in captivity? Get up on my back, and I'll take you to your 
comrades." 

"No, diat's impossible!" die boy answered. "I have pledged my 
word diat I would stay here till I am liberated." 

"What sort of nonsense are you talking?" protested Gorgo. 
"In die first place they brought you here against your will; dien 
diey forced you to promise diat you would remain here. Surely 
you must understand diat such a promise one need not keep?" 

"Oh, no, I must keep it," said the boy. "I diank you all die 
same for your kind intention, but you can't help me." 

"Oh, can't I?" said Gorgo. "We'll see about diat!" In a 
twinkling he grasped Nils Holgersson in his big talons, and rose 



with him toward the skies, disappearing in a northerly direction. 

IX 
ON OVER GASTRIKLAND 

THE PRECIOUS GIRDLE 

Wednesday, June fifteenth 

THE eagle kept on flying until he was a long distance north of 
Stockholm. Then he sank to a wooded hillock where he relaxed 
his hold on the hoy. 

The instant Thumhietot was out of Gorgo's clutches he started 
to run hack to the city as fast as he could. 

The eagle made a long swoop, caught up to the boy, and 
stopped him with his claw. 

"Do you propose to go back to prison?" he demanded. 

"That's my affair. I can go where I like, for all of you!" 
retorted the boy, trying to get away. Thereupon tire eagle gripped 
him with his strong talons, and rose in the air. 

Now Gorgo circled over tire entire province of Uppland and 
did not stop again until he came to tire great water-falls at 
Alvkarleby where he alighted on a rock in the middle of the 
rushing rapids below the roaring falls. Again he relaxed his hold 
on the captive. 

The boy saw that here there was no chance of escape from the 
eagle. Above them the white scum wall of tire water-fall came 
tumbling down, and round about the river rushed along in a 
mighty torrent. Thumbietot was very indignant to think that in this 
way he had been forced to become a promise-breaker. He turned 
his back to the eagle, and would not speak to him. 

Now that tire bird had set tire boy down in a place from which 
he could not run away, he told him confidentially that he had been 
brought up by Akka from Kebnekaise, and that he had quarrelled 
with his foster-mother. 

"Now, Thumbietot, perhaps you understand why I wish to 
take you back to the wild geese," he said. "I have heard that you 
are in great favour with Akka, and it was my purpose to ask you to 
make peace between us." 

As soon as tire boy comprehended that the eagle had not 
carried him off in a spirit of contrariness, he felt kindly toward 
him. 

"I should like very much to help you," he returned, "but I am 
bound by my promise." Thereupon he explained to the eagle how 



he had fallen into captivity and how Clement Larsson had left 
Skansen without setting him free. 

Nevertheless the eagle would not relinquish his plan. 

"Listen to me, Thumbietot," he said. "My wings can carry you 
wherever you wish to go, and my eyes can search out whatever you 
wish to find. Tell me how the man looks who exacted this promise 
from you, and I will find him and take you to him. Then it is for 
you to do the rest." 

Thumbietot approved of the proposition. 

"I can see, Gorgo, that you have had a wise bird like Akka for 
a foster-mother," the boy remarked. 

He gave a graphic description of Clement Larsson, and added 
that he had heard at Skansen that the little fiddler was from 
Halsingland. 

"We'll search for him through the whole of Halsingland— from 
Ljungby to Mellansjo; from Great Mountain to Hornland," said 
the eagle. "To-morrow before sundown you shall have a talk with 
the man!" 

"I fear you are promising more than you can perform," 
doubted the boy. 

"I should be a mighty poor eagle if I couldn't do that much," 
said Gorgo. 

So, when Gorgo and Thumbietot left Alvkarleby they were 
good friends, and the boy willingly took his mount for a ride on 
the eagle's back. Thus he had an opportunity to see much of the 
country. 

When clutched in the eagle's talons he had seen nothing. 
Perhaps it was just as well, for in the forenoon he had traveled 
over Upsala, Osterby's big factories, the Dannemora Mine, and 
the ancient castle of Orbyhus, and he would have been sadly 
disappointed at not seeing them had he known of their proximity. 

The eagle bore him speedily over Gastrikland. In the southern 
part of the province there was very little to tempt the eye. But as 
they flew northward, it began to be interesting. 

"This country is clad in a spruce skirt and a gray-stone jacket," 
thought die boy. "But around its waist it wears a girdle which has 
not its match in value, for it is embroidered with blue lakes and 
green groves. The great ironworks adorn it like a row of precious 
stones, and its buckle is a whole city with castles and cathedrals 
and great clusters of houses." When the travelers arrived in the 
northern forest region, Gorgo alighted on top of a mountain. As 
the boy dismounted, the eagle said: 

"There's game in this forest, and I can't forget my late captivity 
and feel really free until I have gone a hunting. You won't mind 
my leaving you for a while?" 

"No, of course, I won't," the boy assured him. 

"You may go where you like so that you are back here by 



sundown," said die eagle, as he flew off. 

The hoy sat on a stone gazing across die hare, rocky ground 
and die great forests round about. 

He felt radier lonely. But soon he heard singing in die forest 
helow, and saw somediing bright moving amongst die trees. 
Presentiy he saw a blue and yellow hanner, and he knew by the 
songs and die merry chatter diat it was heing borne at die head of 
a procession. On it came, up the winding path; he wondered 
where it and diose who followed it were going. He couldn't believe 
diat anybody would come up to such an ugly, desolate waste as die 
place where he sat. But the banner was nearing die forest border, 
and behind it marched many happy people for whom it had led 
the way. Suddenly diere was life and movement all over die 
mountain plain; after diat diere was so much for the boy to see 
diat he didn't have a dull moment. 



FOREST DAY 

On die mountain's hroad hack, where Gorgo left Thumhietot, 
diere had been a forest fire ten years before. Since diat time die 
charred trees had heen felled and removed, and die great fire- 
swept area had begun to deck itself with green along die edges, 
where it skirted die healthy forest. However, die larger part of die 
top was still barren and appallingly desolate. Charred stumps, 
standing sentinel-like between die rock ledges, hore witness diat 
once diere had been a fine forest here; but no fresh shoots sprang 
from die ground. 

One day in die early summer all die children in die parish had 
assembled in front of die schoolhouse near die fire -swept 
mountain. Each child carried eidier a spade or a hoe on its 
shoulder, and a basket of food in its hand. As soon as all were 
assembled, diey marched in a long procession toward die forest. 
The hanner came first, witii die teachers on eidier side of it; dien 
followed a couple of foresters and a wagon load of pine shrubs 
and spruce seeds; dien die children. 

The procession did not pause in any of die birch groves near 
die settiements, hut marched on deep into die forest. As it moved 
along, die foxes stuck dieir heads out of die lairs in astonishment, 
and wondered what kind of backwoods people diese were. As 
diey marched past old coal pits where charcoal kilns were fired 
every autumn, the cross-beaks twisted dieir hooked hills, and 
asked one anodier what kind of coalers diese might be who were 
now thronging die forest. 

Finally, die procession reached die hig, burnt mountain plain. 
The rocks had been stripped of die fine twin-flower creepers diat 
once covered diem; diey had heen robbed of die pretty silver 



moss and die attractive reindeer moss. Around die dark water 
gadiered in clefts and hollows diere was now no wood-sorrel. The 
littie patches of soil in crevices and between stones were widiout 
ferns, widiout star-flowers, widiout all die green and red and light 
and soft and soothing tilings which usually clothe the forest 
ground. 

It was as if a bright light flashed upon die mountain when all 
die parish children covered it. Here again was something sweet 
and delicate; something fresh and rosy; something young and 
growing. Perhaps these children would bring to die poor 
abandoned forest a littie new life. 

When the children had rested and eaten their luncheon, they 
seized hoes and spades and began to work. The foresters showed 
them what to do. They set out shrub after shrub on every clear 
spot of earth they could find. 

As they worked, they talked quite knowingly among 
themselves of how the little shrubs they were planting would bind 
die soil so that it could not get away, and of how new soil would 
form under die trees. By and by seeds would drop, and in a few 
years they would be picking both strawberries and raspberries 
where now there were only bare rocks. The littie shrubs which 
they were planting would gradually become tall trees. Perhaps big 
houses and great splendid ships would be built from them! 

If the children had not come here and planted while there was 
still a littie soil in the clefts, all the earth would have been carried 
away by wind and water, and die mountain could never more have 
been clothed in green. 

"It was well that we came," said die children. "We were just in 
the nick of time!" They felt very important. 

While they were working on the mountain, their parents were 
at home. By and by they began to wonder how the children were 
getting along. Of course it was only a joke about their planting a 
forest, but it might be amusing to see what they were trying to do. 

So presently both fathers and mothers were on their way to the 
forest. When they came to the outlying stock farms they met some 
of their neighbours. 

"Are you going to the fire-swept mountain?" they asked. 

"There's where we're bound for." 

"To have a look at die children?" 

"Yes, to see what they're up to." 

"It's only play, of course." 

"It isn't likely that there will be many forest trees planted by 
die youngsters. We have brought die coffee pot along so that we 
can have something warm to drink, since we must stay there all 
day with only lunch-basket provisions." 

So the parents of the children went on up die mountain. At 
first they thought only of how pretty it looked to see all the rosy- 



cheeked little children scattered over die gray hills. Later, diey 
observed how the children were working— how some were setting 
out shrubs, while others were digging furrows and sowing seeds. 
Others again were pulling up headier to prevent its choking die 
young trees. They saw that the children took die work seriously 
and were so intent upon what diey were doing diat diey scarcely 
had time to glance up. 

The fathers and mothers stood for a moment and looked on; 
dien diey too began to pull up headier— just for the fun of it. The 
children were the instructors, for diey were already trained, and 
had to show dieir elders what to do. 

Thus it happened diat all die grown-ups who had come to 
watch die children took part in die work. Then, of course, it 
became greater fun dian before. By and by the children had even 
more help. Odier implements were needed, so a couple of long- 
legged boys were sent down to die village for spades and hoes. As 
diey ran past die cabins, die stay-at-homes came out and asked: 
"What's wrong? Has diere been an accident?" 

"No, indeed! But the whole parish is up on die fire -swept 
mountain planting a forest." 

"If die whole parish is diere, we can't stay at home!" So party 
after party of peasants went crowding to die top of the burnt 
mountain. They stood a moment and looked on. The temptation 
to join die workers was irresistible. 

"It's a pleasure to sow one's own acres in die spring, and to 
diink of die grain diat will spring up from die eardi, but tiiis work 
is even more alluring," diey diought. 

Not only slender blades would come from diat sowing, but 
mighty trees widi tall trunks and sturdy branches. It meant giving 
birdi not merely to a summer's grain, but to many years' growths. 
It meant die awakening hum of insects, die song of die dirush, die 
play of grouse and all kinds of life on the desolate mountain. 
Moreover, it was like raising a memorial for coming generations. 
They could have left a bare, treeless height as a heritage. Instead 
they were to leave a glorious forest. 

Coming generations would know dieir forefatiiers had been a 
good and wise folk and diey would remember diem with 
reverence and gratitude. 



X 
A DAY IN HALSINGLAND 

A LARGE GREEN LEAF 

Thursday, June sixteenth 

THE following day the boy traveled over Halsingland. It spread 
beneath him with new, pale -green shoots on die pine trees, new 
birch leaves in die groves, new green grass in die meadows, and 
sprouting grain in die fields. It was a mountainous country, but 
directly through it ran a broad, light valley from eidier side of 
which branched odier valleys— some short and narrow, some 
broad and long. 

"This land resembles a leaf," diought die boy, "for it's as green 
as a leaf, and die valleys subdivide it in about die same way as die 
veins of a leaf are foliated." 

The branch valleys, like die main one, were filled widi lakes, 
rivers, farms, and villages. They snuggled, light and smiling, 
between die dark mountains until diey were gradually squeezed 
togedier by die hills. There diey were so narrow diat diey could 
not hold more dian a littie brook. 

On die high land between die valleys there were pine forests 
which had no even ground to grow upon. There were mountains 
standing all about, and die forest covered the whole, like a woolly 
hide stretched over a bony body. 

It was a picturesque country to look down upon, and die boy 
saw a good deal of it, because die eagle was trying to find the old 
fiddler, Clement Larsson, and flew from ravine to ravine looking 
for him. 

A littie later in die morning diere was life and movement on 
every farm. The doors of die cattie sheds were thrown wide open 
and the cows were let out. They were prettily coloured, small, 
supple and sprighdy, and so sure-footed diat diey made die most 
comic leaps and bounds. After them came the calves and sheep, 
and it was plainly to be seen diat diey, too, were in die best of 
spirits. 

It grew livelier every moment in die farm yards. A couple of 
young girls widi knapsacks on dieir backs walked among die cattie; 
a boy with a long switch kept the sheep together, and a littie dog 
ran in and out among die cows, barking at die ones diat tried to 
gore him. The farmer hitched a horse to a cart loaded widi tubs of 
butter, boxes of cheese, and all kinds of eatables. The people 
laughed and chattered. They and die beasts were alike merry— as if 
looking forward to a day of real pleasure. 



A moment later all were on their way to the forest. One of the 
girls walked in the lead and coaxed the catde with pretty, musical 
calls. The animals followed in a long line. The shepherd hoy and 
die sheepdog ran hidier and diither, to see diat no creature turned 
from die right course; and last came die farmer and his hired man. 
They walked beside die cart to prevent its being upset, for die 
road diey followed was a narrow, stony forest path. 

It may have been the custom for all the peasants in 
Halsingland to send dieir catde into die forests on the same day— 
or perhaps it only happened so diat year; at any rate die boy saw 
how processions of happy people and catde wandered out from 
every valley and every farm and rushed into die lonely forest, 
filling it widi life. From die depdis of die dense woods die boy 
heard die shepherd maidens' songs and the tinkle of die cow bells. 
Many of die processions had long and difficult roads to travel; and 
die boy saw how diey tramped dirough marshes, how diey had to 
take roundabout ways to get past windfalls, and how, time and 
again, die carts bumped against stones and turned over with all 
dieir contents. But die people met all die obstacles with jokes and 
laughter. 

In die afternoon diey came to a cleared space where catde 
sheds and a couple of rude cabins had been built. The cows 
mooed with delight as diey tramped on die luscious green grass in 
the yards between die cabins, and at once began grazing. The 
peasants, with merry chatter and banter, carried water and wood 
and all that had been brought in die carts into die larger cabin. 
Presendy smoke rose from die chimney and dien die dairymaids, 
die shepherd boy, and the men squatted upon a flat rock and ate 
dieir supper. 

Gorgo, die eagle, was certain diat he should find Clement 
Larsson among diose who were off for the forest. Whenever he 
saw a stock farm procession, he sank down and scrutinized it with 
his sharp eyes; but hour after hour passed widiout his finding die 
one he sought. 

After much circling around, toward evening diey came to a 
stony and desolate tract east of die great main valley. There die 
boy saw anodier outiying stock farm under him. The people and 
the catde had arrived. The men were splitting wood, and die 
dairymaids were milking die cows. 

"Look diere!" said Gorgo. "I diink we've got him." 

He sank, and, to his great astonishment, die boy saw diat die 
eagle was right. There indeed stood littie Clement Larsson 
chopping wood. 

Gorgo alighted on a pine tree in die diick woods a littie away 
from die house. 

"I have fulfilled my obligation," said die eagle, widi a proud 
toss of his head. "Now you must try and have a word widi die 



man. I'll perch here at the top of the thick pine and wait for you." 



THE ANIMALS' NEW YEAR'S EVE 

The day's work was done at die forest ranches, supper was 
over, and the peasants sat ahout and chatted. It was a long time 
since they had heen in the forest of a summer's night, and they 
seemed reluctant to go to hed and sleep. It was as light as day, and 
the dairymaids were husy with their needle -work. Ever and anon 
they raised their heads, looked toward the forest and smiled. 
"Now we are here again!" they said. The town, with its unrest, 
faded from their minds, and the forest, with its peaceful stillness, 
enfolded them. When at home they had wondered how they 
should ever he ahle to endure the loneliness of the woods; hut 
once there, they felt that they were having their hest time. 

Many of the young girls and young men from neighbouring 
ranches had come to call upon them, so that there were quite a lot 
of folk seated on the grass before the cabins; but they did not find 
it easy to start conversation. The men were going home the next 
day, so the dairymaids gave them little commissions and bade 
them take greetings to their friends in the village. This was nearly 
all that had been said. 

Suddenly the eldest of the dairy girls looked up from her work 
and said laughingly: 

"There's no need of our sitting here so silent tonight, for we 
have two story-tellers with us. One is Clement Larsson, who sits 
beside me, and the other is Bernhard from Sunnasjo, who stands 
back there gazing toward Black's Ridge. I think that we should ask 
each of them to tell us a story. To the one who entertains us the 
better I shall give the muffler I am knitting." 

This proposal won hearty applause. The two competitors 
offered lame excuses, naturally, but were quickly persuaded. 
Clement asked Bernhard to begin, and he did not object. He 
knew litde of Clement Larsson, but assumed that he would come 
out with some story about ghosts and trolls. As he knew that 
people liked to listen to such tilings, he diought it best to choose 
something of die same sort. 

"Some centuries ago," he began, "A dean here in Delsbo 
township was riding dirough die dense forest on a New Year's 
Eve. He was on horseback, dressed in fur coat and cap. On die 
pommel of his saddle hung a satchel in which he kept the 
communion service, die Prayer-book, and the clerical robe. He 
had been summoned on a parochial errand to a remote forest 
settiement, where he had talked with a sick person until late in the 
evening. Now he was on his way home, but feared diat he should 
not get back to the rector}' until after midnight. 



"As he had to sit in die saddle when he should have been at 
home in his bed, he was glad it was not a rough night. The weadier 
was mild, the air still and the skies overcast. Behind the clouds 
hung a full round moon which gave some light, although it was out 
of sight. But for that faint light it would have been impossible for 
him to distinguish paths from fields, for that was a snowless winter, 
and all tilings, had the same grayish-brown colour. 

"The horse the dean rode was one he prized very highly. He 
was strong and sturdy, and quite as wise as a human being. He 
could find his way home from any place in the township. The 
dean had observed this on several occasions, and he relied upon it 
with such a sense of security that he never troubled himself to 
think where he was going when he rode that horse. So he came 
along now in the gray night, through the bewildering forest, with 
the reins dangling and his thoughts far away. 

"He was thinking of the sermon he had to preach on the 
morrow, and of much else besides, and it was a long time before it 
occurred to him to notice how far along he was on his homeward 
way. When he did glance up, he saw that the forest was as dense 
about him as at the beginning, and he was somewhat surprised, for 
he had ridden so long that he should have come to the inhabited 
portion of the township. 

"Delsbo was about the same then as now. The church and 
parsonage and all the large farms and villages were at the northern 
end of the township, while at the southern part there were only 
forests and mountains. The dean saw that he was still in the 
unpopulated district and knew that he was in the southern part 
and must ride to the north to get home. There were no stars, nor 
was there a moon to guide him; but he was a man who had the 
four cardinal points in his head. He had the positive feeling that 
he was traveling southward, or possibly eastward. 

"He intended to turn the horse at once, but hesitated. The 
animal had never strayed, and it did not seem likely that he would 
do so now. It was more likely that the dean was mistaken. He had 
been far away in thought and had not looked at the road. So he let 
the horse continue in the same direction, and again lost himself in 
his reverie. 

"Suddenly a big branch struck him and almost swept him off 
the horse. Then he realized that he must find out where he was. 

"He glanced down and saw that he was riding over a soft 
marsh, where there was no beaten path. The horse trotted along at 
a brisk pace and showed no uncertainty. Again the dean was 
positive that he was going in the wrong direction, and now he did 
not hesitate to interfere. He seized the reins and turned the horse 
about, guiding him back to the roadway. No sooner was he there 
than he turned again and made straight for the woods. 

"The dean was certain that he was going wrong, but because 



die beast was so persistent he thought that probably he was trying 
to find a better road, and let him go along. 

"The horse did very well, aldiough he had no padi to follow. If 
a precipice obstructed his way, he climbed it as nimbly as a goat, 
and later, when tiiey had to descend, he bunched his hoofs and 
slid down die rocky inclines. 

'"May he only find his way home before church hour!' diought 
the dean. 'I wonder how die Delsbo folk would take it if I were 
not at my church on time?' 

"He did not have to brood over this long, for soon he came to 
a place that was familiar to him. It was a little creek where he had 
fished die summer before. Now he saw it was as he had feared— he 
was in die depths of die forest, and die horse was plodding along 
in a south-easterly direction. He seemed determined to carry die 
dean as far from church and rectory as he could. 

"The clergyman dismounted. He could not let die horse carry 
him into die wilderness. He must go home. And, since the animal 
persisted in going in die wrong direction, he decided to walk and 
lead him until they came to more familiar roads. The dean wound 
the reins around his arm and began to walk. It was not an easy 
matter to tramp dirough die forest in a heavy fur coat; but die 
dean was strong and hardy and had little fear of overexertion. 

"The horse, meanwhile, caused him fresh anxiety. He would 
not follow but planted his hoofs firmly on die ground and balked. 

"At last the dean was angry. He had never beaten diat horse, 
nor did he wish to do so now. Instead, he direw down die reins 
and walked away. 

'"We may as well part company here, since you want to go 
your own way,' he said. 

"He had not taken more dian two steps before die horse came 
after him, took a cautious grip on his coat sleeve and stopped him. 
The dean turned and looked die horse straight in die eyes, as if to 
search out why he behaved so strangely. 

"Afterward die dean could not quite understand how diis was 
possible, but it is certain diat, dark as it was, he plainly saw die 
horse's face and read it like diat of a human being. He realized 
diat die animal was in a terrible state of apprehension and fear. He 
gave his master a look diat was bodi imploring and reproachful. 

'"I have served you day after day and done your bidding,' he 
seemed to say. 'Will you not follow me diis one night?' 

"The dean was touched by die appeal in die animal's eyes. It 
was clear diat die horse needed his help to-night, in one way or 
anodier. Being a man dirough and dirough, the dean prompdy 
determined to follow him. Widiout furtiier delay he sprang into 
the saddle. 'Go on!' he said. 'I will not desert you since you want 
me. No one shall say of die dean in Delsbo that he refused to 
accompany any creature who was in trouble.' 



"He let die horse go as he wished and diought only of keeping 
his seat. It proved to be a hazardous and troublesome journey- 
uphill most of die way. The forest was so diick diat he could not 
see two feet ahead, but it appeared to him diat diey were 
ascending a high mountain. The horse climbed perilous steeps. 
Had die dean been guiding, he should not have thought of riding 
over such ground. 

'"Surely you don't intend to go up to Black's Ridge, do you?' 
laughed die dean, who knew diat was one of die highest peaks in 
Halsingland. 

"During die ride he discovered diat he and the horse were not 
die only ones who were out diat night. He heard stones roll down 
and branches crackle, as if animals were breaking dieir way 
through die forest. He remembered diat wolves were plentiful in 
diat section and wondered if die horse wished to lead him to an 
encounter widi wild beasts. 

"They mounted up and up, and die higher diey went die more 
scattered were die trees. At last diey rode on almost bare highland, 
where die dean could look in every direction. He gazed out over 
immeasurable tracts of land, which went up and down in 
mountains and valleys covered widi sombre forests. It was so dark 
that he had difficulty in seeing any orderly arrangement; but 
presendy he could make out where he was. 

'"Why of course it's Black's Ridge diat I've come to!' he 
remarked to himself. 'It can't be any odier mountain, for diere, in 
die west, I see Jarv Island, and to die east the sea glitters around 
Ag Island. Toward die north also I see something shiny. It must 
be Dellen. In die depths below me I see white smoke from Nian 
Falls. Yes I'm up on Black's Ridge. What an adventure!' 

"When diey were at die summit die horse stopped behind a 
diick pine, as if to hide. The dean bent forward and pushed aside 
die branches, that he might have an unobstructed view. 

"The mountain's bald pate confronted him. It was not empty 
and desolate, as he had anticipated. In the middle of die open 
space was an immense boulder around which many wild beasts 
had gadiered. Apparendy diey were holding a conclave of some 
sort. 

"Near to die big rock he saw bears, so firmly and heavily built 
diat diey seemed like fur-clad blocks of stone. They were lying 
down and dieir little eyes blinked impatiendy; it was obvious diat 
they had come from dieir winter sleep to attend court, and diat 
diey could hardly keep awake. Behind diem, in tight rows, were 
hundreds of wolves. They were not sleepy, for wolves are more 
alert in winter dian in summer. They sat upon their haunches, like 
dogs, whipping die ground widi dieir tails and panting— dieir 
tongues lolling far out of dieir jaws. Behind die wolves die lynx 
skulked, stiff-legged and clumsy, like misshapen cats. They w r ere 



loath to be among the other beasts, and hissed and spat when one 
came near them. The row back of die lynx was occupied by die 
wolverines, widi dog faces and bear coats. They were not happy 
on die ground, and diey stamped dieir pads impatiendy, longing to 
get into die trees. Behind diem, covering die entire space to die 
forest border, leaped die foxes, the weasels, and die martens. 
These were small and perfecdy formed, but diey looked even 
more savage and blooddiirsty dian die larger beasts. 

"All this die dean plainly saw, for die whole place was 
illuminated. Upon die huge -rock at die centre was the Wood- 
nymph, who held in her hand a pine torch which burned in a big 
red flame. The Nymph was as tall as die tallest tree in die forest. 
She wore a spruce-brush mande and had spruce-cone hair. She 
stood very still, her face turned toward die forest. She was 
watching and listening. 

"The dean saw everything as plain as plain could be, but his 
astonishment was so great that he tried to combat it, and would 
not believe die evidence of his own eyes. 

'"Such tilings cannot possibly happen!' he thought. 'I have 
ridden much too long in die bleak forest. This is only an optical 
illusion.' 

"Nevertheless he gave the closest attention to the spectacle, 
and wondered what was about to be done. 

"He hadn't long to wait before he caught die sound of a 
familiar bell, coming from die depths of the forest, and die next 
moment he heard footfalls and crackling of branches— as when 
many animals break through the forest. 

"A big herd of cattle was climbing the mountain. They came 
through the forest in the order in which they had marched to die 
mountain ranches. First came the bell cow followed by die bull, 
then the other cows and die calves. The sheep, closely herded, 
followed. After them came the goats, and last were die horses and 
colts. The sheep-dog trotted along beside die sheep; but neither 
shepherd nor shepherdess attended them. 

"The dean thought it heart-rending to see die tame animals 
coming straight toward die wild beasts. He would gladly have 
blocked their way and called 'Halt!' but he understood that it was 
not within human power to stop the march of the cattle on this 
night; therefore he made no move. 

"The domestic animals were in a state of torment over that 
which they had to face. If it happened to be die bell cow's turn, 
she advanced with drooping head and faltering step. The goats 
had no desire either to play or to butt. The horses tried to bear up 
bravely, but their bodies were all of a quiver with fright. The most 
pathetic of all was the sheep-dog. He kept his tail between his legs 
and crawled on the ground. 

"The bell cow led die procession all die way up to die Wood- 



nymph, who stood on the houlder at the top of die mountain. The 
cow walked around die rock and dien turned toward die forest 
widiout any of die wild beasts touching her. In die same way all 
die catde walked unmolested past die wild beasts. 

"As the creatures filed past, die dean saw the Wood-nymph 
lower her pine torch over one and anodier of diem. 

"Every time this occurred die beasts of prey broke into loud, 
exultant roars— particularly when it was lowered over a cow or 
some odier large creature. The animal that saw the torch turning 
toward it uttered a piercing shriek, as if it had received a knife 
dirust in its flesh, while die entire herd to which it belonged 
bellowed their lamentations. 

"Then die dean began to comprehend die meaning of what he 
saw. Surely he had heard diat die animals in Delsbo assembled on 
Black's Ridge every New Year's Eve, diat die Wood-nymph might 
mark out which among die tame beasts would diat year be prey 
for die wild beasts. The dean pitied die poor creatures diat were at 
the mercy of savage beasts, when in reality diey should have no 
master but man. 

"The leading herd had only just left when anodier bell tinkled, 
and die catde from anodier farm tramped to die mountain top. 
These came in die same order as die first and marched past die 
Wood-nymph, who stood die re, stern and solemn, indicating 
animal after animal for deadi. 

"Herd upon herd followed, widiout a break in die line of 
procession. Some were so small diat diey included only one cow 
and a few sheep; others consisted of only a pair of goats. It was 
apparent diat diese were from very humble homes, but diey too 
were compelled to pass in review. 

"The dean diought of die Delsbo farmers, who had so much 
love for dieir beasts. 'Did diey but know of it, surely diey would 
not allow a repetition of diis!' he diought. 'They would risk tiieir 
own lives ratiier dian let their catde wander amongst bears and 
wolves, to be doomed by die Wood-nymph!' 

"The last herd to appear was die one from die rectory farm. 
The dean heard die sound of die familiar bell a long way off. The 
horse, too, must have heard it, for he began to shake in every 
limb, and was badied in sweat. 

"'So it is your turn now to pass before die Wood-nymph to 
receive your sentence,' die dean said to the horse. 'Don't be 
afraid! Now I know why you brought me here, and I shall not 
leave you.' 

"The fine catde from the parsonage farm emerged from the 
forest and marched to die Wood-nymph and die wild beasts. Last 
in die line was the horse that had brought his master to Black's 
Ridge. The dean did not leave the saddle, but let die animal take 
him to die Wood-nymph. 



"He had neither knife nor gun for his defence, hut he had 
taken out die Prayer-hook and sat pressing it to his heart as he 
exposed himself to hatde against evil. 

"At first it appeared as if none had ohserved him. The dean's 
catde filed past die Wood-nymph in die same order as die others 
had done. She did not wave die torch toward any of diese, but as 
soon as die intelligent horse stepped forward, she made a 
movement to mark him for deadi. 

"Instandy die dean held up die Prayer-hook, and die torchlight 
fell upon die cross on its cover. The Wood-nymph uttered a loud, 
shrill cry; die torch dropped from her hand and fell to die ground. 

"Immediately the flame was extinguished. In die sudden 
transition from light to darkness die dean saw nodiing, nor did he 
hear anydiing. Ahout him reigned die profound stillness of a 
wilderness in winter. 

"Then die dark clouds parted, and dirough die opening 
stepped die full round moon to shed its light upon die ground. 
The dean saw diat he and die horse were alone on die summit of 
Black's Ridge. Not one of the many wild beasts was there. The 
ground had not been trampled by die herds diat had passed over 
it; but die dean himself sat widi his Prayer-book before him, while 
die horse under him stood trembling and foaming. 

"By die time die dean reached home he no longer knew 
wiiether or not it had been a dream, a vision, or reality— diis diat 
he had seen; but he took it as a warning to him to remember die 
poor creatures who were at the mercy of wild beasts. He preached 
so powerfully to die Delsbo peasants diat in his day all die wolves 
and bears were exterminated from diat section of die country, 
although diey may have returned since his time." 

Here Bernhard ended his story. He received praise from all 
sides and it seemed to be a foregone conclusion diat he would get 
die prize. The majority diought it almost a pity diat Clement had 
to compete widi him. 

But Clement, undaunted, began: 

"One day, while I was living at Skansen, just outside of 
Stockholm, and longing for home—" Then he told about die tiny 
midget he had ransomed so diat he would not have to be confined 
in a cage, to be stared at by all die people. He told, also, that no 
sooner had he performed this act of mercy than he was rewarded 
for it. He talked and talked, and die astonishment of his hearers 
grew greater and greater; but when he came to die royal lackey 
and die beautiful book, all die dairymaids dropped dieir needle- 
work and sat staring at Clement in open-eyed wonder at his 
marvellous experiences. 

As soon as Clement had finished, die eldest of die dairymaids 
announced diat he should have die muffler. 

"Bernhard related only things diat happened to anodier, but 



Clement has himself heen the hero of a true story, which I 
consider far more important." 

In this all concurred. They regarded Clement widi very 
different eyes after hearing diat he had talked widi die King, and 
die litde fiddler was afraid to show how proud he felt. But at die 
very height of his elation some one asked him what had hecome 
of die midget. 

"I had no time to set out die hlue howl for him myself," said 
Clement, "so I asked die old Laplander to do it. What has 
hecome of him since then I don't know." 

No sooner had he spoken than a little pine cone came along 
and struck him on die nose. It did not drop from a tree, and none 
of die peasants had thrown it. It was simply impossible to tell 
whence it had come. 

"Alia, Clement!" winked die dairymaid, "it appears as if die 
tiny folk were listening to us. You should not have left it to anodier 
to set out diat blue howl!" 



XI 
IN MEDELPAD 

Friday, June seventeenth 

THE hoy and die eagle were out bright and early the next 
morning. Gorgo hoped diat he would get far up into West 
Bothnia diat day. As luck would have it, he heard die boy remark 
to himself diat in a country like the one dirough which diey were 
now traveling it must be impossible for people to live. 

The land which spread below diem was Soudiern Medelpad. 
When die eagle heard die hoy's remark, he replied: 

"Up here diey have forests for fields." 

The boy diought of die contrast hetween die light, golden-rye 
fields widi dieir delicate blades diat spring up in one summer, and 
die dark spruce forest widi its solid trees which took many years to 
ripen for harvest. 

"One who has to get his livelihood from such a field must have 
a deal of patience!" he observed. 

Notiiing more was said until diey came to a place where the 
forest had heen cleared, and die ground was covered with stumps 
and lopped-off branches. As diey flew over diis ground, die eagle 
heard die boy mutter to himself diat it was a mighty ugly and 
poverty-stricken place. 

"This field was cleared last winter," said the eagle. 

The boy diought of die harvesters at home, who rode on dieir 



reaping machines on fine summer mornings, and in a short time 
mowed a large field. But the forest field was harvested in winter. 
The lumbermen went out in the wilderness when the snow was 
deep, and the cold most severe. It was tedious work to fell even 
one tree, and to hew down a forest such as this they must have 
been out in the open many weeks. 

"They have to be hardy men to mow a field of this kind," he 
said. 

When the eagle had taken two more wing strokes, they sighted 
a log cabin at the edge of the clearing. It had no windows and only 
two loose boards for a door. The roof had been covered with bark 
and twigs, but now it was gaping, and the boy could see that inside 
die cabin there were only a few big stones to serve as a fireplace, 
and two board benches. When they were above the cabin the 
eagle suspected that the boy was wondering who could have lived 
in such a wretched hut as that. 

"The reapers who mowed the forest field lived there," the 
eagle said. 

The boy remembered how the reapers in his home had 
returned from their day's work, cheerful and happy, and how the 
best his mother had in the larder was always spread for them; 
wiiile here, after the arduous work of the day, they must rest on 
hard benches in a cabin that w r as w r orse than an outhouse. And 
wiiat they had to eat he could not imagine. 

"I wonder if there are any harvest festivals for these 
labourers?" he questioned. 

A little farther on they saw below them a wretchedly bad road 
winding through the forest. It w r as narrow and zigzag, hilly and 
stony, and cut up by brooks in many places. As they flew over it 
the eagle knew that the boy was wondering what w r as carted over a 
road like that. 

"Over this road the harvest was conveyed to the stack," the 
eagle said. 

The boy recalled wiiat fun they had at home when the harvest 
wagons drawn by two sturdy horses, carried the grain from the 
field. The man who drove sat proudly on top of the load; the 
horses danced and pricked up their ears, while the village 
children, wiio were allowed to climb up on the sheaves, sat there 
laughing and shrieking, half-pleased, half-frightened. But here the 
great logs w r ere drawn up and down steep hills; here the poor 
horses must be worked to their limit, and the driver must often be 
in peril. "I'm afraid there has been very little cheer along this 
road," die boy observed. 

The eagle flew on with powerful wing strokes, and soon they 
came to a river bank covered with logs, chips, and bark. The eagle 
perceived that die boy w r ondered why it looked so littered up 
down there. 



"Here die harvest has been stacked," the eagle told him. 

The boy thought of how the grain stacks in his part of the 
country were piled up close to the farms, as if diey were dieir 
greatest ornaments, while here the harvest was borne to a desolate 
river strand, and left diere. 

"I wonder if any one out in diis wilderness counts his stacks, 
and compares diem widi his neighbour's?" he said. 

A litde later diey came to Ljungen, a river which glides dirough 
a broad valley. Immediately everything was so changed diat diey 
might well diink diey had come to another country. The dark 
spruce forest had stopped on die inclines above die valley, and die 
slopes were clad in light-stemmed birches and aspens. The valley 
was so broad diat in many places die river widened into lakes. 
Along die shores lay a large flourishing town. 

As diey soared above die valley die eagle realized diat die boy 
was wondering if die fields and meadows here could provide a 
livelihood for so many people. 

"Here live the reapers who mow die forest fields," die eagle 
said. 

The boy was diinking of die lowly cabins and the hedged-in 
farms down in Skane when he exclaimed: 

"Why, here die peasants live in real manors. It looks as if it 
might be wordi one's while to work in die forest!" 

The eagle had intended to travel straight north, but when he 
had flown out over die river he understood diat die boy wondered 
who handled die timber after it was stacked on die river bank. 

The boy recollected how careful diey had been at home never 
to let a grain be wasted, while here were great rafts of logs floating 
down die river, uncared for. He could not believe diat more dian 
half of die logs ever reached dieir destination. Many were floating 
in midstream, and for diem all went smoothly; others moved close 
to die shore, bumping against points of land, and some were left 
behind in die still waters of die creeks. On die lakes diere were so 
many logs diat diey covered die entire surface of die water. These 
appeared to be lodged for an indefinite period. At die bridges they 
stuck; in die falls diey were bunched, dien diey were pyramided 
and broken in two; afterward, in die rapids, they were blocked by 
the stones and massed into great heaps. 

"I wonder how long it takes for die logs to get to die mill?" 
said die boy. 

The eagle continued his slow flight down River Ljungen. Over 
many places he paused in die air on outspread wings, diat die boy 
might see how diis kind of harvest work was done. 

Presendy diey came to a place where die loggers were at work. 
The eagle marked that die boy wondered what diey were doing. 

"They are die ones who take care of all die belated harvest," 
die eagle said. 



The boy remembered the perfect ease with which his people 
at home had driven their grain to the mill. Here the men ran 
alongside die shores widi long boat-hooks, and widi toil and effort 
urged die logs along. They waded out in die river and were soaked 
from top to toe. They jumped from stone to stone far out into die 
rapids, and diey tramped on die rolling log heaps as calmly as 
though diey were on flat ground. They were daring and resolute 
men. 

"As I watch this, I'm reminded of die iron-moulders in the 
mining districts, who juggle widi fire as if it were perfecdy 
harmless," remarked die boy. "These loggers play widi water as if 
they were its masters. They seem to have subjugated it so diat it 
dare not harm them." 

Gradually diey neared die moudi of die river, and Bodinia 
Bay was beyond diem. Gorgo ffew no fardier straight ahead, but 
went northward along die coast. Before diey had traveled very far 
diey saw a lumber camp as large as a small city. While die eagle 
circled back and fordi above it, he heard die boy remark diat this 
place looked interesting. 

"Here you have die great lumber camp called Svartvik," the 
eagle said. 

The boy thought of die mill at home, which stood peacefully 
embedded in foliage, and moved its wings very slowly. This mill, 
where they grind die forest harvest, stood on die water. 

The mill pond was crowded with logs. One by one die helpers 
seized diem widi dieir cant-hooks, crowded diem into the chutes 
and hurried diem along to the whirling saws. What happened [to] 
die logs inside, die boy could not see, but he heard loud buzzing 
and roaring, and from die odier end of die house small cars ran 
out, loaded widi white planks. The cars ran on shining tracks 
down to die lumber yard, where die planks were piled in rows, 
forming streets— like blocks of houses in a city. In one place diey 
were building new piles; in anodier diey were pulling down old 
ones. These were carried aboard two large vessels which lay 
waiting for cargo. The place was alive widi workmen, and in die 
woods, back of die yard, diey had dieir homes. 

"They'll soon manage to saw up all die forests in Medelpad 
die way diey work here," said die boy. 

The eagle moved his wings just a little , and carried die boy 
above anodier large camp, very much like die first, widi die mill, 
yard, wharf, and die homes of die workmen. 

"This is called Kukikenborg," die eagle said. 

He flapped his wings slowly, flew past two big lumber camps, 
and approached a large city. When die eagle heard die boy ask 
the name of it, he cried: "This is Sundsvall, die manor of die 
lumber districts." 

The boy remembered die cities in Skane, which looked so old 



and gray and solemn; while here in die hleak Nordi dre city of 
Sundsvall laced a beautiful bay, and looked young and happy and 
beaming. There was something odd about die city when one saw it 
from above, for in die middle stood a cluster of tall stone 
structures which looked so imposing diat dieir match was hardly to 
be found in Stockholm. Around die stone buildings diere was a 
large open space, dien came a wreath of frame houses which 
looked pretty and cozy in dieir litde gardens; but diey seemed to 
be conscious of die fact diat diey were very much poorer than die 
stone houses, and dared not venture into their neighbourhood. 

"This must be bodi a wealthy and powerful city," remarked 
die boy. "Can it be possible diat die poor forest soil is die source 
of all this?" 

The eagle flapped his wings again, and went over to Aln 
Island, which lies opposite Sundsvall. The boy was gready 
surprised to see all the sawmills diat decked die shores. On Aln 
Island diey stood, one next anodier, and on die mainland 
opposite were mill upon mill, lumber yard upon lumber yard. He 
counted forty, at least, but believed diere were many more. 

"How wonderful it all looks from up here!" he marvelled. "So 
much life and activity I have not seen in any place save this on the 
whole trip. It is a great country diat we have! Wherever I go, diere 
is always somediing new for people to live upon." 



XII 
A MORNING IN ANGERMANLAND 

THE BREAD 

Saturday, June eighteen tli 

NEXT morning, when die eagle had flown some distance into 
Angermanland, he remarked diat to-day he was die one who was 
hungry, and must find somediing to eat! He set the boy down in 
an enormous pine on a high mountain ridge, and away he flew. 

The boy found a comfortable seat in a cleft branch from which 
he could look down over Angermanland. It was a glorious 
morning! The sunshine gilded die treetops; a soft breeze played in 
die pine needles; die sweetest fragrance was wafted dirough die 
forest; a beautiful landscape spread before him; and die boy 
himself was happy and care -free. He felt diat no one could be 
better off. 

He had a perfect outiook in every direction. The country west 
of him was all peaks and table -land, and die tardier away diey 



were, die higher and wilder diey looked. To die east diere were 
also many peaks, hut diese sank lower and lower toward die sea, 
where die land became perfecdy flat. Everywhere he saw shining 
rivers and brooks which were having a troublesome journey widi 
rapids and falls so long as diey ran between mountains, but spread 
out clear and broad as diey neared die shore of die coast. Bodmia 
Bay was dotted widi islands and notched widi points, but fardier 
out was open, blue water, like a summer sky. 

When die boy had had enough of die landscape he unloosed 
his knapsack, took out a morsel of fine white bread, and began to 
eat. 

"I don't diink I've ever tasted such good bread," said he. "And 
how much I have left! There's enough to last me for a couple of 
days." As he munched he thought of how he had come by die 
bread. 

"It must be because I got it in such a nice way diat it tastes so 
good to me," he said. 

The golden eagle had left Medelpad die evening before. He 
had hardly crossed die border into Angermanland when die boy 
caught a glimpse of a fertile valley and a river, which surpassed 
anything of die kind he had seen before. 

As die boy glanced down at die rich valley, he complained of 
feeling hungry. He had had no food for two whole days, he said, 
and now he was famished. Gorgo did not wish to have it said that 
die boy had fared worse in his company dian when he traveled 
widi die wild geese, so he slackened his speed. 

"Why haven't you spoken of diis before?" he asked. "You 
shall have all die food you want. There's no need of your starving 
when you have an eagle for a traveling companion." 

Just dien die eagle sighted a farmer who was sowing a field 
near die river strand. The man carried die seeds in a basket 
suspended from his neck, and each time that it was emptied he 
refilled it from a seed sack which stood at die end of die furrow. 
The eagle reasoned it out diat die sack must be filled widi die best 
food diat die boy could wish for, so he darted toward it. But 
before die bird could get diere a terrible clamour arose about him. 
Sparrows, crows, and swallows came rushing up widi wild shrieks, 
diinking diat die eagle meant to swoop down upon some bird. 

"Away, away, robber! Away, away, bird-killer!" diey cried. 
They made such a racket diat it attracted die farmer, who came 
running, so diat Gorgo had to flee, and die boy got no seed. 

The small birds behaved in die most extraordinary manner. 
Not only did diey force die eagle to flee, diey pursued him a long 
distance down die valley, and everywhere die people heard dieir 
cries. Women came out and clapped their hands so diat it 
sounded like a volley of musketry, and die men rushed out widi 
rifles. 



The same tiling was repeated every time the eagle swept 
toward die ground. The hoy ahandoned die hope diat die eagle 
could procure any food for him. It had never occurred to him 
hefore diat Gorgo was so much hated. He almost pitied him. 

In a little while they came to a homestead where die housewife 
had just heen halting. She had set a platter of sugared huns in the 
back yard to cool and was standing beside it, watching, so diat die 
cat and dog should not steal die buns. 

The eagle circled down to the yard, but dared not alight right 
under die eyes of the peasant woman. He flew up and down, 
irresolute; twice he came down as far as the chimney, dien rose 
again. 

The peasant woman noticed die eagle. She raised her head 
and followed him widi her glance. 

"How peculiarly he acts!" she remarked. "I believe he wants 
one of my buns." 

She was a beautiful woman, tall and fair, with a cheery, open 
countenance. Laughing heartily, she took a bun from die platter, 
and held it above her head. 

"If you want it, come and take it!" she challenged. 

While die eagle did not understand her language, he knew at 
once diat she was offering him the bun. Widi lightning speed, he 
swooped to die bread, snatched it, and flew toward die heights. 

When die boy saw the eagle snatch die bread he wept for joy- 
not because he would escape suffering hunger for a few days, but 
because he was touched by die peasant woman's sharing her bread 
widi a savage bird of prey. 

Where he now sat on die pine branch he could recall at will 
die tall, fair woman as she stood in die yard and held up die 
bread. 

She roust have known diat die large bird was a golden eagle— a 
plunderer, who was usually welcomed with loud shots; doubdess 
she had also seen die queer changeling he bore on his back. But 
she had not thought of what diey were. As soon as she understood 
diat diey were hungry, she shared her good bread widi diem. 

"If I ever become human again," diought die boy, "I shall look 
up die pretty woman who lives near die great river, and diank her 
for her kindness to us." 



THE FOREST FIRE 

While die boy w r as still at his breakfast he smelled a faint 
odour of smoke coming from die north. He turned and saw a tiny 
spiral, white as a mist, rise from a forest ridge— not from die one 
nearest him, but from die one beyond it. It looked strange to see 
smoke in die wild forest, but it might be that a mountain stock 



farm lay over yonder, and die women were boiling dieir morning 
coffee. 

It was remarkable die way diat smoke increased and spread! It 
could not come from a ranch, but perhaps diere were charcoal 
kilns in die forest. 

The smoke increased every moment. Now it curled over die 
whole mountain top. It was not possible diat so much smoke 
could come from a charcoal kiln. There must be a conflagration 
of some sort, for many birds flew over to die nearest ridge. Hawks, 
grouse, and odier birds, who were so small that it was impossible 
to recognize diem at such a distance, fled from die fire. 

The tiny white spiral of smoke grew to a diick white cloud 
which rolled over die edge of die ridge and sank toward die valley. 
Sparks and flakes of soot shot up from the clouds, and here and 
diere one could see a red flame in die smoke. A big fire was raging 
over there, but what was burning? Surely diere was no large farm 
hidden in die forest. 

The source of such a fire must be more than a farm. Now die 
smoke came not only from die ridge, but from die valley below it, 
which die boy could not see, because die next ridge obstructed his 
view. Great clouds of smoke ascended; die forest itself was 
burning! 

It was difficult for him to grasp die idea diat die fresh, green 
pines could burn. If it really were die forest that was burning, 
perhaps die fire might spread all die way over to him. It seemed 
improbable; but he wished die eagle would soon return. It would 
be best to be away from this. The mere smell of die smoke which 
he drew in with every breath was a torture. 

All at once he heard a terrible crackling and sputtering. It 
came from the ridge nearest him. There, on the highest point, 
stood a tall pine like die one in which he sat. A moment before it 
had been a gorgeous red in die morning light. Now all die needles 
flashed, and the pine caught fire. Never before had it looked so 
beautiful! But this was die last time it could exhibit any beauty, for 
die pine was die first tree on die ridge to burn. It was impossible 
to tell how die flames had reached it. Had die fire flown on red 
wings, or crawled along die ground like a snake? It was not easy to 
say, but diere it was at all events. The great pine burned like a 
birch stem. 

All, look! Now smoke curled up in many places on the ridge. 
The forest fire was both bird and snake. It could fly in die air over 
wide stretches, or steal along die ground. The whole ridge was 
ablaze! 

There was a hasty flight of birds diat circled up through the 
smoke like big flakes of soot. They flew across die valley and came 
to die ridge where die boy sat. A horned owl perched beside him, 
and on a branch just above him a hen hawk alighted. These would 



have been dangerous neighbours at any other time, but now they 
did not even glance in his direction— only stared at the fire. 
Probably they could not make out what was wrong with the forest. 
A marten ran up the pine to the tip of a branch; and looked at the 
burning heights. Close beside the marten sat a squirrel, but they 
did not appear to notice each other. 

Now the fire came rushing down the slope, hissing and roaring 
like a tornado. Through the smoke one could see the flames dart 
from tree to tree. Before a branch caught fire it was first enveloped 
in a thin veil of smoke, then all the needles grew red at one time, 
and it began to crackle and blaze. 

In the glen below ran a little brook, bordered by elms and 
small birches. It appeared as if the flames would halt there. Leafy 
trees are not so ready to take fire as fir trees. The fire did pause as 
if before a gate that could stop it. It glowed and crackled and tried 
to leap across the brook to the pine woods on the other side, but 
could not reach them. 

For a short time the fire was thus restrained, then it shot a long 
flame over to the large, dry pine that stood on the slope, and this 
was soon ablaze. The fire had crossed the brook! The heat was so 
intense that every tree on the mountain was ready to burn. With 
the roar and rush of the maddest storm and the wildest torrent the 
forest fire flew over to the ridge. 

Then the hawk and the owl rose and the marten dashed down 
the tree. In a few seconds more the fire would reach the top of the 
pine, and the boy, too, would have to be moving. It was not easy to 
slide down the long, straight pine trunk. He took as firm a hold of 
it as he could, and slid in long stretches between the knotty 
branches; finally he tumbled headlong to the ground. He had no 
time to find out if he was hurt— only to hurry away. The fire raced 
down the pine like a raging tempest; the ground under his feet was 
hot and smouldering. On either side of him ran a lynx and an 
adder, and right beside the snake fluttered a mother grouse who 
was hurrying along with her little downy chicks. 

When the refugees descended tire mountain to the glen they 
met people fighting tire fire. They had been there for sonre time, 
but tire boy had been gazing so intently in tire direction of tire fire 
that he had not noticed them before. 

In this glen there was a brook, bordered by a row of leaf trees, 
and back of these trees the people worked. They felled tire fir 
trees nearest tire elnrs, dipped water from tire brook and poured it 
over tire ground, washing away heather and myrtle to prevent the 
fire from stealing up to tire birch brush. 

They, too, drought only of tire fire which was now rushing 
toward them. The fleeing animals ran in and out among tire nren's 
feet, without attracting attention. No one struck at tire adder or 
tried to catch tire mother grouse as she ran back and forth with her 



little peeping birdlings. They did not even bother about 
Thumbietot. In their hands they held great, charred pine branches 
which had dropped into die brook, and it appeared as if diey 
intended to challenge the lire widi diese weapons. There were not 
many men, and it was strange to see them stand diere, ready to 
light, when all other living creatures were fleeing. 

As die fire came roaring and rushing down die slope widi its 
intolerable heat and suffocating smoke, ready to hurl itself over 
brook and leaf-tree wall in order to reach die opposite shore 
without having to pause, die people drew back at first as if unable 
to withstand it; but diey did not flee far before diey turned back. 

The conflagration raged widi savage force, sparks poured like 
a rain of lire over die leaf trees, and long tongues of flame shot 
hissingly out from die smoke, as if die forest on die odier side 
were sucking diem in. 

But die leal-tree wall was an obstruction behind which the 
men worked. When die ground began to smoulder diey brought 
water in dieir vessels and dampened it. When a tree became 
wreatiied in smoke diey felled it at once, direw it down and put 
out die flames. Where die lire crept along die heather, diey beat it 
widi die wet pine branches and smothered it. 

The smoke was so dense that it enveloped everything. One 
could not possibly see how die batfle was going, but it was easy 
enough to understand diat it was a hard light, and diat several 
times die lire came near penetrating fardier. 

But diink! Alter a while die loud roar of die flames decreased, 
and die smoke cleared. By diat time die leaf trees had lost all dieir 
foliage, die ground under diem was charred, die faces of die men 
were blackened by smoke and dripping widi sweat; but die forest 
fire was conquered. It had ceased to flame up. Soft white smoke 
crept along die ground, and from it peeped out a lot of black 
stumps. This was all diere was left of die beautiful forests! 

The boy scrambled up on a rock, so diat he might see how die 
fire had been quenched. But now diat die forest was saved, his 
peril began. The owl and die hawk simultaneously turned dieir 
eyes toward him. Just then he heard a familiar voice calling to him. 

Gorgo, die golden eagle, came sweeping dirough die forest, 
and soon die boy was soaring among die clouds— rescued from 
every peril. 



XIII 
WESTBOTTOM AND LAPLAND 

THE FIVE SCOUTS 

ONCE, at Skansen, die boy had sat under die steps of Bollnas 
cottage and had overheard Clement Larsson and die old 
Laplander talk about Norrland. Bodi agreed diat it was die most 
beautiful part of Sweden. Clement diought diat the southern part 
was die best, while die Laplander favoured die nordiern part. 

As diey argued, it became plain diat Clement had never been 
tardier nordi dian Harnosand. The Laplander laughed at him for 
speaking widi such assurance of places diat he had never seen. 

"I diink I shall have to tell you a story, Clement, to give you 
some idea of Lapland, since you have not seen it," volunteered die 
Laplander. 

"It shall not be said of me diat I refuse to listen to a story," 
retorted Clement, and die old Laplander began: 

"It once happened diat die birds who lived down in Sweden, 
soudi of die great Sameland, diought diat diey were overcrowded 
tiiere and suggested moving nordiward. 

"They came togedier to consider die matter. The young and 
eager birds wished to start at once, but die older and wiser ones 
passed a resolution to send scouts to explore die new country. 

'"Let each of die five great bird families send out a scout,' said 
the old and wise birds, 'to learn if tiiere is room for us all up 
tiiere— food and hiding places.' 

"Five intelligent and capable birds were immediately 
appointed by die five great bird families. 

"The forest birds selected a grouse, die field birds a lark, the 
sea birds a gull, die fresh-water birds a loon, and die cliff birds a 
snow sparrow. 

"When die five chosen ones were ready to start, the grouse, 
who was the largest and most commanding, said: 

"'There are great stretches of land ahead. If we travel together, 
it will be long before we cover all the territory that we must 
explore. If, on the other hand, we travel singly— each one exploring 
his special portion of the country— the whole business can be 
accomplished in a few days.' 

"The odier scouts thought the suggestion a good one, and 
agreed to act upon it. 

"It was decided diat die grouse should explore die midlands. 
The lark was to travel to the eastward, die sea gull still farther east, 
where the land bordered on die sea, while die loon should fly over 
die territory west of die midlands, and the snow sparrow to die 



extreme west. 

"In accordance with this plan, the five hirds flew over the 
whole Northland. Then tire)' turned hack and told the assembly of 
birds what they had discovered. 

"The gull, who had traveled along tire sea-coast, spoke first. 

"'The North is a fine country,' he said. 'The sounds are full of 
fish, and there are points and islands without number. Most of 
these are uninhabited, and tire birds will find plenty of roonr there. 
The humans do a little fishing and sailing in tire sounds, but not 
enough to disturb tire birds. If tire sea birds follow my advice, they 
will move north immediately.' 

"When tire gull had finished, tire lark, who had explored tire 
laird back fronr tire coast, spoke: 

'"I don't know what tire gull nreans by his islands and points,' 
said tire lark. 'I have traveled only over great fields and flowery 
nreadows. I have never before seen a country crossed by so many 
large streams. Their shores are dotted with homesteads, and at tire 
mouth of tire rivers are cities; but for tire nrost part tire country is 
very desolate. If tire field birds follow my advice, they will move 
north immediately.' 

"After tire lark canre tire grouse, who had flown over tire 
midlands. 

'"I know neither what the lark means with his nreadows nor 
tire gull with his islands and points,' said he. 'I have seen only pine 
forests on this whole trip. There are also many rushing streams 
and great stretches of moss-grown swanrp laird; but all that is not 
river or swanrp is forest. If tire forest birds follow my advice, they 
will move north immediately." 

"After tire grouse canre tire loon, who had explored the 
borderland to tire west. 

'"I don't know what tire grouse nreans by his forests, nor do I 
know where the eyes of tire lark and tire gull could have been,' 
remarked tire loon. 'There's hardly any land up there— only big 
lakes. Between beautiful shores glisten clear, blue mountain lakes, 
which pour into roaring w r ater-falls. If tire freshwater birds follow 
nry advice, they will move north immediately.' 

"The last speaker was tire snow sparrow, who had flown along 
tire western boundary. 

'"I don't know what the loon nreans by his lakes, nor do I 
know what countries tire grouse, tire lark, and , tire gull can have 
seen,' he said. 'I found one vast mountainous region up north. I 
didn't run across any fields or any pine forests, but peak after peak 
and highlands. I have seen ice fields and snow and mountain 
brooks, with water as wirite as nrilk. No farnrers nor cattle nor 
homesteads have I seen, but only Laps and reindeer and huts met 
my eyes. If the cliff birds follow nry advice, they will move north 
immediately.' 



"When die five scouts had presented dieir reports to the 
assemhly, diey hegan to call one anodier liars, and were ready to 
fly at each odier to prove die trudi of dieir arguments. 

"But die old and wise hirds who had sent diem out, listened to 
dieir accounts with joy, and calmed dieir fighting propensities. 

'"You mustn't quarrel among yourselves,' diey said. 'We 
understand from your reports diat up nordi diere are large 
mountain tracts, a hig lake region, great forest lands, a wide plain, 
and a hig group of islands. This is more than we have expected— 
more dian many a mighty kingdom can hoast within its horders.'" 



THE MOVING LANDSCAPE 

Saturday, June eighteen tli 

The hoy had heen reminded of die old Laplander's story 
hecause he himself was now traveling over die country of which he 
had spoken. The eagle told him diat die expanse of coast which 
spread heneatii them was Westhottom, and diat die hlue ridges far 
to die west were in Lapland. 

Only to he once more seated comfortahly on Gorgo's hack, 
after all diat he had suffered during die forest fire, was a pleasure. 
Besides, diey were having a fine trip. The flight was so easy diat at 
times it seemed as if they were standing still in die air. The eagle 
heat and heat his wings, without appearing to move from die spot; 
on die odier hand, everything under diem seemed in motion. The 
whole eardi and all tilings on it moved slowly soudiward. The 
forests, die fields, die fences, die rivers, the cities, die islands, die 
sawmills— all were on die march. The boy wondered whither diey 
were bound. Had diey grown tired of standing so far north, and 
wished to move toward die soudi? 

Amid all die objects in motion diere was only one diat stood 
still: diat was a railway train. It stood direcdy under diem, for it was 
widi die train as with Gorgo— it could not move from die spot. The 
locomotive sent fordi smoke and sparks. The clatter of the wheels 
could be heard all die way up to die boy, but the train did not 
seem to move. The forests rushed by; die flag station rushed by; 
fences and telegraph poles rushed by; but the train stood still. A 
broad river with a long bridge came tow r ard it, but die river and die 
bridge glided along under die train with perfect ease. Finally a 
railway station appeared. The station master stood on die platform 
with his red flag, and moved slowly tow r ard die train. 

When he w r aved his little flag, die locomotive belched even 
darker smoke curls dian before, and whisded mournfully because 
it had to stand still. All of a sudden it began to move toward die 
soudi, like everything else. 



The boy saw all the coach doors open and die passengers step 
out while both cars and people were moving southward. 

He glanced away from die eardi and tried to look straight 
ahead. Staring at die queer railway train had made him dizzy; but 
after he had gazed for a moment at a litde white cloud, he was 
tired of diat and looked down again— diinking all die while diat die 
eagle and himself were quite still and diat everything else was 
traveling on soudi. Fancy! Suppose die grain field just dien 
running along under him— which must have been newly sown for 
he had not seen a green blade on it— were to travel all die way 
down to Skane where die rye was in full bloom at diis season! 

Up here die pine forests were different: The trees were bare, 
die branches short and die needles were almost black. Many trees 
were bald at die top and looked sickly. If a forest like diat were to 
journey down to Kolmarden and see a real forest, how inferior it 
would feel! 

The gardens which he now saw had some pretty bushes, but 
no fruit trees or lindens or chestnut trees— only mountain ash and 
birch. There were some vegetable beds, but diey were not as yet 
hoed or planted. 

"If such an apology for a garden were to come trailing into 
Sormland, die province of gardens, wouldn't it diink itself a poor 
wilderness by comparison?" 

Imagine an immense plain like the one now gliding beneadi 
him, coming under the very eyes of the poor Smaland peasants! 
They w r ould hurry away from dieir meagre garden plots and stony 
fields, to begin plowing and sowing. 

There was one tiling, however, of which this Northland had 
more dian other lands, and diat was light. Night must have set in, 
for die cranes stood sleeping on die morass; but it was as light as 
day. The sun had not traveled soudiward, like every other thing. 
Instead, it had gone so far nordi that it shone in the boy's face. To 
all appearance, it had no notion of setting that night. 

If this light and diis sun w r ere only shining on West 
Vemmenhog! It would suit die boy's fatiier and modier to a dot to 
have a working day diat lasted twenty-four hours. 



THE DREAM 

Sunday, June nineteenth 

The boy raised his head and looked around, perfectly 
bewildered. It was mighty queer! Here he lay sleeping in some 
place where he had not been before. No, he had never seen tiiis 
glen nor the mountains round about; and never had he noticed 
such puny and shrunken birches as those under which he now lay. 



Where was die eagle? The hoy could see no sign of him. 
Gorgo must have deserted him. Well, here was anodier 
adventure! 

The hoy lay down again, closed his eyes, and tried to recall die 
circumstances under which he had dropped to sleep. 

He rememhered diat as long as he was traveling over 
Westhottom he had fancied diat die eagle and he were at a 
standstill in the air, and that the land under them was moving 
southward. As die eagle turned northwest, die wind had come 
from diat side, and again he had felt a current of air, so diat die 
land helow had stopped moving and he had noticed diat die eagle 
was hearing him onward widi terrific speed. 

"Now we are flying into Lapland," Gorgo had said, and die 
boy had hent forward, so diat he might see die country of which 
he had heard so much. 

But he had felt radier disappointed at not seeing anything hut 
great tracts of forest land and wide marshes. Forest followed 
marsh and marsh followed forest. The monotony of die whole 
finally made him so sleepy diat he had nearly dropped to die 
ground. 

He said to die eagle diat he could not stay on his hack anodier 
minute, hut must sleep awhile. Gorgo had prompdy swooped to 
die ground, where the boy had dropped down on a moss tuft. 
Then Gorgo put a talon around him and soared into die air widi 
him again. 

"Go to sleep, Thumbietot!" he cried. "The sunshine keeps me 
awake and I want to continue die journey." 

Although die boy hung in diis uncomfortable position, he 
actually dozed and dreamed. 

He dreamed diat he was on a broad road in southern Sweden, 
hurrying along as fast as his little legs could carry him. He was not 
alone, many wayfarers were tramping in die same direction. Close 
beside him marched grain-filled rye blades, blossoming corn 
flowers, and yellow daisies. Heavily laden apple trees went puffing 
along, followed by vine-covered bean stalks, big clusters of white 
daisies, and masses of berry bushes. Tall beeches and oaks and 
lindens strolled leisurely in die middle of die road, dieir branches 
swaying, and diey stepped aside for none. Between die boy's tiny 
feet darted die little flowers— wild strawberry blossoms, white 
anemones, clover, and forget-me-nots. At first he thought diat only 
the vegetable family was on die march, but presendy he saw diat 
animals and people accompanied diem. The insects were buzzing 
around advancing bushes, die fishes were swimming in moving 
ditches, die birds were singing in strolling trees. Bodi tame and 
wild beasts were racing, and amongst all diis people moved along- 
some widi spades and scydies, others widi axes, and odiers, again, 
widi fishing nets. 



The procession marched with gladness and gayety, and he did 
not wonder at that when he saw who was leading it. It was nodiing 
less than the Sun itself diat rolled on like a great shining head widi 
hair of many-hued rays and a countenance beaming widi 
merriment and kindliness! 

"Forward, march!" it kept calling out. "None need feel anxious 
whilst I am here. Forward, march!" 

"I wonder where die Sun wants to take us to?" remarked die 
boy. A rye blade diat walked beside him heard him, and 
immediately answered: 

"He wants to take us up to Lapland to fight die Tee Witch." 

Presendy die boy noticed that some of the travelers hesitated, 
slowed up, and finally stood quite still. He saw that die tall beech 
tree stopped, and diat die roebuck and die wheat blade tarried by 
die wayside, likewise die blackberry bush, the littie yellow 
buttercup, die chestnut tree, and die grouse. 

He glanced about him and tried to reason out why so many 
stopped. Then he discovered diat diey were no longer in soudiern 
Sweden. The march had been so rapid diat diey were already in 
Svealand. 

Up there die oak began to move more cautiously. It paused 
awhile to consider, took a few faltering steps, then came to a 
standstill. 

"Why doesn't die oak come along?" asked die boy. 

"It's afraid of die Ice Witch," said a fair young birch that 
tripped along so boldly and cheerfully diat it was a joy to watch it. 
The crowd hurried on as before. In a short time they were in 
Norrland, and now it mattered not how much die Sun cried and 
coaxed— die apple tree stopped,die cherry tree stopped, die rye 
blade stopped! 

The boy turned to diem and asked: 

"Why don't you come along? Why do you desert die Sun?" 

"We dare not! We're afraid of die Ice Witch, who lives in 
Lapland," they answered. 

The boy comprehended diat diey were far nordi, as die 
procession grew diinner and diinner. The rye blade, the barley, 
die wild strawberry, die blueberry bush, die pea stalk, die currant 
bush had come along as far as diis. The elk and the domestic cow 
had been walking side by side, but now diey stopped. The Sun no 
doubt would have been almost deserted if new followers had not 
happened along. Osier bushes and a lot of brushy vegetation 
joined die procession. Laps and reindeer, mountain owl and 
mountain fox and willow grouse followed. 

Then die boy heard somediing coming toward diem. He saw 
great rivers and creeks sweeping along widi terrible force. 

"Why are diey in such a hurry?" he asked. 

"They are running away from die Ice Witch, who lives up in 



the mountains." 

All of a sudden die boy saw before him a high, dark, turreted 
wall. Instantly die Sun turned its beaming face toward diis wall and 
flooded it widi light. Then it became apparent diat it was no wall, 
but die most glorious mountains, which loomed up— one behind 
anodier. Their peaks were rose-coloured in die sunlight, dieir 
slopes azure and gold tinted. 

"Onward, onward!" urged die Sun as it climbed die steep 
cliffs. "There's no danger so long as I am with you." 

But half way up, die bold young birch deserted— also the 
sturdy pine and the persistent spruce, and diere, too, die 
Laplander, die reindeer, and die willow brush deserted. At last, 
when die Sun reached die top, diere was no one but die little tot, 
Nils Holgersson, who had followed it. 

The Sun rolled into a cave, where die walls were bedecked 
with ice, and Nils Holgersson wanted to follow, but fardier dian 
the opening of the cave he dared not venture, for in diere he saw 
somediing dreadful. 

Far back in die cave sat an old witch with an ice body, hair of 
icicles, and a mande of snow! 

At her feet lay diree black wolves, who rose and opened dieir 
jaws when die Sun approached. From die moudi of one came a 
piercing cold, from the second a blustering north wind, and from 
die diird came impenetrable darkness. 

"That must be die Ice Witch and her tribe," diought die boy. 

He understood that now was die time for him to flee, but he 
was so curious to see die outcome of die meeting between die Sun 
and die Ice Witch that he tarried. 

The Ice Witch did not move— only turned her hideous face 
toward die Sun. The Sun stood still and just beamed and smiled. 
This continued for a short time. It appeared to die boy diat die 
witch was beginning to sigh and tremble. Her snow mantle fell, 
and die diree ferocious wolves howled less savagely. 

Suddenly die Sun cried: 

"Now my time is up!" and rolled out of die cave. 

Then die Ice Witch let loose her three wolves. Instandy die 
Nordi Wind, Cold, and Darkness rushed from die cave and 
began to chase die Sun. 

"Drive him out! Drive him back!" shrieked die Ice Witch. 
"Chase him so far diat he can never come back! Teach him diat 
Lapland is MINE!" 

But Nils Holgersson felt so unhappy when he saw diat die Sun 
was to be driven from Lapland diat he awakened with a cry. When 
he recovered his senses, he found himself at die bottom of a 
ravine. 

But where w r as Gorgo? How r w r as he to find out where he 
himself was? 



He arose and looked all around him. Then he happened to 
glance upward and saw a peculiar structure of pine twigs and 
branches that stood on a cliff-ledge. 

"That must be one of diose eagle nests diat Gorgo— " But diis 
was as far as he got. He tore off his cap, waved it in die air, and 
cheered. 

Now he understood where Gorgo had brought him. This was 
die very glen where die wild geese lived in summer, and just above 
it was the eagles' cliff. 

HE HAD ARRIVED! 

He would meet Morten Goosey-Gander and Akka and all die 
odier comrades in a few moments. Hurrah! 



THE MEETING 

All was still in die glen. The sun had not yet stepped above die 
cliffs, and Nils Holgersson knew that it was too early in die 
morning for die geese to be awake. 

The boy walked along leisurely and searched for his friends. 
Before he had gone very far, he paused with a smile, for he saw 
such a pretty sight. A wild goose was sleeping in a neat litde nest, 
and beside her stood her goosey-gander. He too, slept, but it was 
obvious diat he had stationed himself dius near her diat he might 
be on hand in die possible event of danger. 

The boy went on without disturbing diem and peeped into die 
willow brush diat covered die ground. It was not long before he 
spied another goose couple. These were strangers, not of his flock, 
but he was so happy diat he began to hum— just because he had 
come across wild geese. 

He peeped into anodier bit of brushwood. There at last he 
saw two that were familiar. 

It was certainly Nelja diat was nesting there, and the goosey- 
gander who stood beside her was surely Kolme. Why, of course! 

The boy had a good mind to awaken diem, but he let diem 
sleep on, and walked away. 

In die next brush he saw Viisi and Kuusi, and not far from 
diem he found Yksi and Kaksi. All four were asleep, and the boy 
passed by without disturbing diem. 

As he approached die next brush, he thought he saw 
something white shimmering among die bushes, and die heart of 
him thumped widi joy. 

Yes, it was as he expected. In diere sat the dainty Dunfin on 
an egg-filled nest. Beside her stood her white goosey-gander. 
Aldiough he slept, it was easy to see how proud he was to watch 
over his wife up here among die Lapland mountains. The boy did 
not care to waken die goosey-gander, so he walked on. 



He had to seek a long time before he came across any more 
wild geese. Finally, he saw on a little hillock something that 
resembled a small, gray moss tuft, and he knew that there was 
Akka from Kebnekaise. She stood, wide awake, looking about as 
if she were keeping watch over the whole glen. 

"Good morning, Mother Akka!" said the boy. "Please don't 
waken the other geese yet awhile, for I wish to speak with you in 
private." 

The old leader-goose came rushing down the hill and up to 
the boy. 

First she seized hold of him and shook him, then she stroked 
him with her bill before she shook him again. But she did not say 
a word, since he asked her not to waken the others. 

Thumbietot kissed old Mother Akka on both cheeks, then he 
told her how he had been carried off to Skansen and held captive 
there. 

"Now I must tell you that Smirre Fox, short of an ear, sat 
imprisoned in the foxes' cage at Skansen," said the boy. "Although 
he was very mean to us, I couldn't help feeling sorry for him. 
There were many other foxes in the cage; and they seemed quite 
contented there, but Smirre sat all the while looking dejected, 
longing for liberty. 

"I made many good friends at Skansen, and I learned one day 
from the Lap dog that a man had come to Skansen to buy foxes. 
He was from some island far out in the ocean. All the foxes had 
been exterminated there, and the rats were about to get the better 
of the inhabitants, so they wished the foxes back again. 

"As soon as I learned of this, I went to Smirre' s cage and said 
to him: 

'"To-morrow some men are coming here to get a pair of foxes. 
Don't hide, Smirre, but keep well in the foreground and see to it 
that you are chosen. Then you'll be free again.'" 

"He followed my suggestion, and now he is running at large on 
the island. What say you to this, Mother Akka? If you had been in 
my place, would you not have done likewise?" 

"You have acted in a way that makes me wish I had done that 
myself," said the leader-goose proudly. 

"It's a relief to know that you approve," said the boy. "Now 
there is one tiling more I wish to ask you about: 

"One day I happened to see Gorgo, the eagle— the one that 
fought with Morten Goosey-Gander— a prisoner at Skansen. He 
was in the eagles' cage and looked pitifully forlorn. I was thinking 
of filing down the wire roof over him and letting him out, but I 
also thought of his being a dangerous robber and bird-eater, and 
wondered if I should be doing right in letting loose such a 
plunderer, and if it were not better, perhaps, to let him stay where 
he was. What say you, Mother Akka? Was it right to think thus?" 



"No, it was not right!" retorted Akka. "Say what you will about 
the eagles, they are proud birds and greater lovers of freedom dian 
all odrers. It is not right to keep diem in captivity. 

"Do you know what I would suggest? This: diat, as soon as 
you are well rested, we two make die trip togedier to die big bird 
prison, and liberate Gorgo." 

"That is just die word I was expecting from you, Mother 
Akka," returned die boy eagerly. 

"There are diose who say diat you no longer have any love in 
your heart for die one you reared so tenderly, because he lives as 
eagles must live. But I know now diat it isn't true. I want to see if 
Morten Goosey-Gander is awake. 

"Meanwhile, if you wish to say a 'thank you' to die one who 
brought me here to you, I diink you'll find him up diere on die 
cliff ledge, where once you found a helpless eaglet." 



XIV 
OSA, THE GOOSE GIRL, AND LITTLE MATS 

THE year diat Nils Holgersson traveled with die wild geese 
everybody was talking about two littie children, a boy and a girl, 
who tramped dirough the country. They were from Sunnerbo 
township, in Smaland, and had once lived with their parents and 
four brodiers and sisters in a littie cabin on the heath. 

While the two children, Osa and Mats, were still small, a poor, 
homeless woman came to their cabin one night and begged for 
shelter. Aldiough the place could hardly hold die family, she was 
taken in and die modier spread a bed for her on die floor. In die 
night she coughed so hard diat die children fancied die house 
shook. By morning she was too ill to continue her wanderings. 
The children's fatiier and modier were as kind to her as could be. 
They gave up their bed to her and slept on the floor, while the 
fatiier went to the doctor and brought her medicine. 

The first few days die sick woman behaved like a savage; she 
demanded constant attention and never uttered a word of dianks. 
Later she became more subdued and finally begged to be carried 
out to die headi and left diere to die. 

When her hosts would not hear of diis, she told diem diat die 
last few years she had roamed about with a band of gipsies. She 
herself was not of gypsy blood, but was the daughter of a well-to- 
do farmer. She had run away from home and gone with the 
nomads. She believed diat a gypsy woman who was angry at her 
had brought diis sickness upon her. Nor was that all: The gypsy 
woman had also cursed her, saying diat all who took her under 



their roof or were kind to her should suffer a like fate. She 
believed this, and therefore begged diem to cast her out of die 
house and never to see her again. She did not want to bring 
misfortune down upon such good people. But die peasants 
refused to do her bidding. It was quite possible diat die)' were 
alarmed, but diey were not die kind of folk who could turn out a 
poor, sick person. 

Soon after diat she died, and dien along came die misfortunes. 
Before, diere had never been anything but happiness in diat cabin. 
Its inmates were poor, yet not so very poor. The fadier was a 
maker of weavers' combs, and modier and children helped him 
widi die work. Fadier made die frames, modier and the older 
children did die binding, while die smaller ones planed die teedi 
and cut diem out. They worked from morning until night, but die 
time passed pleasandy, especially when father talked of die days 
when he traveled about in foreign lands and sold weavers' combs. 
Fadier was so jolly diat sometimes mother and the children would 
laugh until their sides ached at his funny quips and jokes. 

The weeks following die deadi of die poor vagabond woman 
lingered in die minds of die children like a horrible nightmare. 
They knew not if die time had been long or short, but tiiey 
remembered diat diey were always having funerals at home. One 
after anodier diey lost dieir brodiers and sisters. At last it was very 
still and sad in die cabin. 

The modier kept up some measure of courage, but die fadier 
was not a bit like himself. He could no longer work nor jest, but 
sat from morning till night, his head buried in his hands, and only 
brooded. 

Once— diat was after die diird burial— die fadier had broken 
out into wild talk, which frightened die children. He said diat he 
could not understand why such misfortunes should come upon 
diem. They had done a kindly tiling in helping the sick woman. 
Could it be true, dien, that the evil in this world was more 
powerful dian die good? 

The modier tried to reason with him, but she was unable to 
sootiie him. 

A few days later die eldest sister was stricken. She had always 
been die fatiier's favourite, so when he realized diat she, too, must 
go, he fled from all the misery. The modier never said anything, 
but she diought it was best for him to be away, as she feared that 
he might lose his reason. He had brooded too long over diis one 
idea: diat God had allowed a wicked person to bring about so 
much evil. 

After die fadier went away diey became very poor. For awhile 
he sent them money, but afterward tilings must have gone badly 
with him, for no more came. 

The day of die eldest daughter's burial die modier closed die 



cabin and left home with the two remaining children, Osa and 
Mats. She went down to Skane to work in the beet fields, and 
found a place at die Jordberga sugar refiner}'. She was a good 
worker and had a cheerful and generous nature. Everybody liked 
her. Many were astonished because she could be so calm after all 
diat she had passed through, but die modier was very strong and 
patient. When any one spoke to her of her two sturdy children, 
she only said: "I shall soon lose them also," without a quaver in 
her voice or a tear in her eye. She had accustomed herself to 
expect nothing else. 

But it did not turn out as she feared. Instead, the sickness 
came upon herself. She had gone to Skane in die beginning of 
summer; before autumn she was gone, and die children were left 
alone. 

While their mother was ill she had often said to die children 
they must remember that she never regretted having let die sick 
woman stop witii them. It was not hard to die when one had done 
right, she said, for then one could go with a clear conscience. 

Before die mother passed away, she tried to make some 
provision for her children. She asked die people with whom she 
lived to let them remain in die room which she had occupied. If 
die children only had a shelter they would not become a burden 
to any one. She knew diat diey could take care of themselves. 

Osa and Mats were allowed to keep die room on condition 
diat diey would tend die geese, as it was always hard to find 
children willing to do that work. It turned out as die mother 
expected: diey did maintain themselves. The girl made candy, and 
die boy carved wooden toys, which diey sold at die farm houses. 
They had a talent for trading and soon began buying eggs and 
butter from die farmers, which diey sold to die workers at die 
sugar refiner} 7 . Osa was the older, and, by die time she was 
diirteen, she was as responsible as a grown woman. She was quiet 
and serious, while Mats was lively and talkative. His sister used to 
say of him diat he could out cackle die geese. 

When die children had been at Jordberga for two years, diere 
was a lecture given one evening at die schoolhouse. Evidendy it 
was meant for grown-ups, but the two Smaland children were in 
die audience. They did not regard themselves as children, and few 
persons thought of diem as such. The lecturer talked about die 
dread disease called die White Plague, which every year carried 
off so many people in Sweden. He spoke very plainly and the 
children understood every word. 

After die lecture diey waited outside the schoolhouse. When 
die lecturer came out diey took hold of hands and walked gravely 
up to him, asking if diey might speak to him. 

The stranger must have wondered at die two rosy, baby-faced 
children standing diere talking witii an earnestness more in 



keeping with people thrice their age; but he listened graciously to 
them. They related what had happened in dieir home, and asked 
the lecturer if he thought dieir mother and their sisters and 
brothers had died of the sickness he had described. 

"Very likely," he answered. "It could hardly have been any 
odier disease." 

If only die modier and fadier had known what die children 
learned diat evening, diey might have protected themselves. If diey 
had burned die clodiing of die vagabond woman; if diey had 
scoured and aired die cabin and had not used die old bedding, all 
whom die children mourned might have been living yet. The 
lecturer said he could not say positively, but he believed that none 
of their dear ones would have been sick had they understood how 
to guard against die infection. 

Osa and Mats waited awhile before putting die next question, 
for that was the most important of all. It was not true then that the 
gypsy woman had sent die sickness because they had befriended 
the one with whom she was angry. It was not something special 
that had stricken only them. The lecturer assured them that no 
person had die power to bring sickness upon another in that way. 

Thereupon the children thanked him and went to their room. 
They talked until late that night. 

The next day they gave notice that they could not tend geese 
another year, but must go elsewhere. Where were they going? 
Why, to try to find their father. They must tell him that their 
modier and die other children had died of a common ailment and 
not something special brought upon diem by an angry person. 
They were very glad diat diey had found out about diis. Now it 
was their duty to tell their fadier of it, for probably he was still 
trying to solve the mystery. 

Osa and Mats set out for dieir old home on die heath. When 
diey arrived diey were shocked to find die littie cabin in flames. 
They went to die parsonage and diere diey learned diat a railroad 
workman had seen dieir fadier at Malmberget, far up in Lapland. 
He had been working in a mine and possibly was still there. When 
the clergyman heard diat die children wanted to go in search of 
dieir fadier he brought forth a map and showed diem how far it 
was to Malmberget and tried to dissuade them from making die 
journey, but die children insisted that diey must find dieir father. 
He had left home believing some tiling diat was not true. They 
must find him and tell him diat it was all a mistake. 

They did not want to spend dieir littie savings buying railway 
tickets, dierefore they decided to go all die way on foot, which 
diey never regretted, as it proved to be a remarkably beautiful 
journey. 

Before diey were out of Smaland, diey stopped at a farm 
house to buy food. The housewife was a kind, motherly soul who 



took an interest in the children. She asked diem who they were 
and where they came from, and diey told her their story. "Dear, 
dear! Dear, dear!" she interpolated time and again when diey were 
speaking. Later she petted die children and stuffed diem widi all 
kinds of goodies, for which she would not accept a penny. When 
they rose to diank her and go, die woman asked diem to stop at 
her hrother's farm in die next township. Of course die children 
were delighted. 

"Give him my greetings and tell him what has happened to 
you," said the peasant woman. 

This die children did and were well treated. From every farm 
after diat it was always: "If you happen to go in such and such a 
direction, stop diere or diere and tell diem what has happened to 
you." 

In every farm house to which diey were sent there was always a 
consumptive. So Osa and Mats went through die country 
unconsciously teaching die people how to comhat diat dreadful 
disease. 

Long, long ago, when die black plague was ravaging the 
country, 'twas said diat a boy and a girl were seen wandering from 
house to house. The boy carried a rake, and if he stopped and 
raked in front of a house, it meant diat diere many should die, but 
not all; for die rake has coarse teetii and does not take everything 
widi it. The girl carried a broom, and if she came along and swept 
before a door, it meant diat all who lived widiin must die; for die 
broom is an implement diat makes a clean sweep. 

It seems quite remarkable that in our time two children should 
wander through die land because of a cruel sickness. But diese 
children did not frighten people widi die rake and the broom. 
They said radier: "We will not content ourselves widi merely 
raking die yard and sweeping die floors, we will use mop and 
brush, water and soap. We will keep clean inside and outside of 
die door and we ourselves will be clean in bodi mind and body. In 
diis way we will conquer die sickness." 

One day, while still in Lapland, Akka took die boy to 
Malmberget, where diey discovered little Mats lying unconscious 
at die moudi of die pit. He and Osa had arrived diere a short time 
before. That morning he had been roaming about, hoping to 
come across his fatiier. He had ventured too near the shaft and 
been hurt by flying rocks after die setting off of a blast. 

Thumbietot ran to die edge of die shaft and called down to die 
miners diat a littie boy was injured. 

Immediately a number of labourers came rushing up to littie 
Mats. Two of diem carried him to die hut where he and Osa were 
staying. They did all diey could to save him, but it was too late. 



Thumbietot felt so sorry for poor Osa. He wanted to help and 
comfort her; hut he knew diat if he were to go to her now, he 
would only frighten her— such as he was! 

The night alter die hurial of litde Mats, Osa straightway shut 
herself in her hut. 

She sat alone recalling, one after anodier, diings her brodier 
had said and done. There was so much to diink about diat she did 
not go straight to bed, hut sat up most of die night. The more she 
diought of her brodier die more she realized how hard it would he 
to live widiout him. At last she dropped her head on die table and 
wept. 

"What shall I do now diat litde Mats is gone?" she sobbed. 

It was far along toward morning and Osa, spent by the strain 
of her hard day, finally fell asleep. 

She dreamed diat litde Mats softly opened die door and 
stepped into die room. 

"Osa, you must go and find ladier," he said. 

"How can I when I don't even know where he is?" she replied 
in her dream. 

"Don't worry about diat," returned litde Mats in his usual, 
cheery way. "I'll send some one to help you." 

Just as Osa, die goose girl, dreamed diat litde Mats had said 
this, diere was a knock at die door. It was a real knock— not 
something she heard in die dream, but she was so held by die 
dream diat she could not tell die real from die unreal. As she went 
on to open the door, she diought: 

"This must he die person litde Mats promised to send me." 

She was right, for it was Thumbietot come to talk to her about 
her fadier. 

When he saw that she was not afraid of him, he told her in a 
few words where her ladier was and how to reach him. 

While he was speaking, Osa, die goose girl, gradually regained 
consciousness; when he had finished she was wide awake. 

Then she was so terrified at die diought of talking widi an elf 
diat she could not say diank you or anything else, hut quickly shut 
die door. 

As she did diat she diought she saw an expression of pain flash 
across die elf s face, but she could not help what she did, for she 
was beside herself with fright. She crept into hed as quickly as she 
could and drew the covers over her head. 

Aldiough she was afraid of the elf, she had a feeling diat he 
meant well hy her. So die next day she made haste to do as he had 
told her. 



XV 
WITH THE LAPLANDERS 

ONE afternoon in July it rained frightfully up around Lake 
Luossajaure. The Laplanders, who live mostly in die open during 
die summer, had crawled under die tent and were squatting round 
die lire drinking coffee. 

The new settlers on the east shore of die lake worked 
diligendy to have dieir homes in readiness hefore die severe Arctic 
winter set in. They wondered at die Laplanders, who had lived in 
die far north for centuries widiout even diinking diat hetter 
protection was needed against cold and storm dian diin tent 
covering. 

The Laplanders, on die odier hand, wondered at die new 
setders giving themselves so much needless, hard work, when 
nothing more was necessary to live comfortably than a few 
reindeer and a tent. 

They only had to drive die poles into die ground and spread 
the covers over diem, and dieir ahodes were ready. They did not 
have to trouble themselves about decorating or furnishing. The 
principal tiling was to scatter some spruce twigs on the floor, 
spread a few skins, and hang die big kettie, in which they cooked 
dieir reindeer meat, on a chain suspended from die top of the tent 
poles. 

While the Laplanders were chatting over their coffee cups, a 
row boat coming from the Kiruna side pulled ashore at die Laps' 
quarters. 

A workman and a young girl, between diirteen and fourteen, 
stepped from die boat. The girl was Osa. The Lap dogs bounded 
down to diem, barking loudly, and a native poked his head out of 
die tent opening to see what was going on. 

He was glad when he saw die workman, for he was a friend of 
die Laplanders— a kindly and sociable man, who could speak dieir 
native tongue. The Lap called to him to crawl under die tent. 

"You're just in time, Soderberg!" he said: "The coffee pot is 
on die fire. No one can do any work in diis rain, so come in and 
tell us die news." 

The workman went in, and, with much ado and amid a great 
deal of laughter and joking, places were made for Soderberg and 
Osa, diough die tent was already crowded to die limit widi natives. 
Osa understood none of die conversation. She sat dumb and 
looked in wonderment at die kettie and coffee pot; at die fire and 
smoke; at die Lap men and Lap women; at die children and dogs; 
die walls and floor; die coffee cups and tobacco pipes; the multi- 
coloured costumes and crude implements. All diis was new to her. 



Suddenly she lowered her glance, conscious that every one in 
the tent was looking at her. Soderberg must have said something 
about her, for now bodi Lap men and Lap women took die short 
pipes from their mouths and stared at her in open-eyed wonder 
and awe. The Laplander at her side patted her shoulder and 
nodded, saying in Swedish, "bra, bra!" (good, good!) A Lap 
woman filled a cup to the brim widi coffee and passed it under 
difficulties, while a Lap boy, who was about her own age, wriggled 
and crawled between die squatters over to her. 

Osa felt that Soderberg was telling die Laplanders diat she had 
just buried her little brother, Mats. She wished he would find out 
about her father instead. 

The elf had said diat he lived widi die Laps, who camped west 
of Lake Luossajaure, and she had begged leave to ride up here on 
a sand truck to seek him, as no regular passenger trains came so 
far. Bodi labourers and foremen had assisted her as best diey 
could. An engineer had sent Soderberg across die lake widi her, as 
he spoke Lappish. She had hoped to meet her fatiier as soon as 
she arrived. Her glance wandered anxiously from face to face, but 
she saw only natives. Her father was not there. 

She noticed that the Laps and die Swede, Soderberg, grew 
more and more earnest as they talked among themselves. The 
Laps shook their heads and tapped their foreheads, as if they were 
speaking of some one that was not quite right in his mind. 

She became so uneasy that she could no longer endure the 
suspense and asked Soderberg what die Laplanders knew of her 
fatiier. 

"They say he has gone fishing," said the workman. "They're 
not sure that he can get back to the camp tonight; but as soon as 
the weather clears, one of them will go in search of him." 

Thereupon he turned to the Laps and went on talking to 
them. He did not wish to give Osa an opportunity to question him 
further about Jon Lsserson. 



THE NEXT MORNING 

Ola Serka himself, who was the most distinguished man 
among the Laps, had said that he would find Osa's father, but he 
appeared to be in no haste and sat huddled outside die tent, 
thinking of Jon Lsserson and wondering how best to tell him of his 
daughter's arrival. It would require diplomacy in order that Jon 
Lsserson might not become alarmed and flee. He was an odd sort 
of man who was afraid of children. He used to say that the sight of 
them made him so melancholy that he could not endure it. 

While Ola Serka deliberated, Osa, die goose girl, and Aslak, 
die young Lap boy who had stared so hard at her die night before, 



sat on the ground in front of the tent and chatted. 

Aslak had heen to school and could speak Swedish. He was 
telling Osa ahout die life of die "Saniefolk," assuring her diat diey 
fared hetter dian odier people. 

Osa thought diat diey lived wretchedly, and told him so. 

"You don't know what you are talking ahout!" said Aslak 
curdy. "Only stop widi us a week and you shall see diat we are die 
happiest people on eardi." 

"If I were to stop here a whole week, I should he choked by 
all die smoke in the tent," Osa retorted. 

"Don't say diat!" protested die boy. "You know nothing of us. 
Let me tell you something which will make you understand diat 
die longer you stay with us die more contented you will become." 

Thereupon Aslak began to tell Osa how a sickness called 
"The Black Plague" once raged diroughout die land. He was not 
certain as to whether it had swept dirough die real "Sameland," 
where diey now were, but in Jamtland it had raged so brutally diat 
among die Saniefolk, who lived in the forests and mountains 
diere, all had died except a boy of fifteen. Among die Swedes, 
who lived in the valleys, none was left but a girl, who was also 
fifteen years old. 

The boy and girl separately tramped die desolate country all 
winter in search of odier human beings. Finally, toward spring, die 
two met. Aslak continued: "The Swedish girl begged die Lap boy 
to accompany her southward, where she could meet people of her 
own race. She did not wish to tarry longer in Jamtland, where 
there were only vacant homesteads. 

"Til take you wherever you wish to go,' said die boy, 'but not 
before winter. It's spring now, and my reindeer go westward 
toward die mountains. You know that w r e who are of die Saniefolk 
must go where our reindeer take us.' 

"The Swedish girl was the daughter of wealthy parents. She 
was used, to living under a roof, sleeping in a bed, and eating at a 
table. She had always despised the poor mountaineers and 
thought that those who lived under die open sky were most 
unfortunate; but she was afraid to return to her home, where there 
were none but die dead. 

'"At least let me go with you to die mountains,' she said to the 
boy, 'so that I sha'n't have to tramp about here all alone and never 
hear die sound of a human voice.' 

"The boy willingly assented, so die girl went with the reindeer 
to die mountains. 

"The herd yearned for die good pastures there, and every day 
tramped long distances to feed on the moss. There was not time 
to pitch tents. The children had to lie on die snowy ground and 
sleep when the reindeer stopped to graze. The girl often sighed 
and complained of being so tired that she must turn back to die 



valley. Nevertheless she went along to avoid being left without 
human companionship. 

"When they reached the highlands the boy pitched a tent for 
die girl on a pretty hill that sloped toward a mountain brook. 

"In die evening he lassoed and milked die reindeer, and gave 
die girl milk to drink. He brought fordi dried reindeer meat and 
reindeer cheese, which his people had stowed away on die heights 
when diey were there die summer before. 

"Still die girl grumbled all die while, and was never satisfied. 
She would eat neither reindeer meat nor reindeer cheese, nor 
would she drink reindeer milk. She could not accustom herself to 
squatting in die tent or to lying on die ground with only a reindeer 
skin and some spruce twigs for a bed. 

"The son of the mountains laughed at her woes and continued 
to treat her kindly. 

"After a few days, die girl went up to die boy when he was 
milking and asked if she might help him. She next undertook to 
make die lire under die kettle, in which die reindeer meat was to 
be cooked, then to carry water and to make cheese. So die time 
passed pleasantly. The weather was mild and food was easily 
procured. Together they set snares for game, fished for salmon- 
trout in die rapids and picked cloudberries in the swamp. 

"When the summer was gone, they moved farther down die 
mountains, where pine and leaf forests meet. There diey pitched 
dieir tent. They had to work hard every day, but fared better, for 
food was even more plentiful than in the summer because of die 
game. 

"When the snow came and die lakes began to freeze, diey 
drew farther east toward die dense pine forests. 

"As soon as die tent was up, the winter's work began. The boy 
taught die girl to make twine from reindeer sinews, to treat skins, 
to make shoes and clodiing of hides, to makes combs and tools of 
reindeer horn, to travel on skis, and to drive a sledge drawn by 
reindeer. 

"When diey had lived through die dark winter and the sun 
began to shine all day and most of die night, the boy said to die 
girl diat now he would accompany her soudiward, so diat she 
might meet some of her own race. 

"Then die girl looked at him astonished. 

'"Why do you want to send me away?' she asked. 'Do you 
long to be alone with your reindeer?' 

'"I thought diat you were die one diat longed to get away?' said 
die boy. 

'"I have lived die life of die Samefolk almost a year now,' 
replied die girl. 'I can't return to my people and live die shut-in 
life after having wandered freely on mountains and in forests. 
Don't drive me away, but let me stay here. Your way of living is 



better than ours.' 

"The girl stayed with the boy for the rest of her life, and never 
again did she long for die valleys. And you, Osa, if you were to 
stay with us only a month, you could never again part from us." 

Widi diese words, Aslak, die Lap boy, finished his story. Just 
dien his fadier, Ola Serka, took die pipe from his moudi and rose. 

Old Ola understood more Swedish dian he was willing to have 
any one know, and he had overheard his son's remarks. While he 
was listening, it had suddenly flashed on him how he should 
handle this delicate matter of telling Jon Esserson diat his daughter 
had come in search of him. 

Ola Serka went down to Lake Luossajaure and had walked a 
short distance along die strand, when he happened upon a man 
who sat on a rock fishing. 

The fisherman was gray-haired and bent. His eyes blinked 
wearily and diere was somediing slack and helpless about him. He 
looked like a man who had tried to carry a burden too heavy for 
him, or to solve a problem too difficult for him, who had become 
broken and despondent over his failure. 

"You must have had luck with your fishing, Jon, since you've 
been at it all night?" said the mountaineer in Lappish, as he 
approached. 

The fisherman gave a start, then glanced up. The bait on his 
hook was gone and not a fish lay on the strand beside him. He 
hastened to rebait die hook and dirow out die line. In the 
meantime die mountaineer squatted on die grass beside him. 

"There's a matter diat I wanted to talk over with you," said 
Ola. "You know diat I had a littie daughter who died last winter, 
and we have always missed her in die tent." 

"Yes, I know," said die fisherman abrupdy, a cloud passing 
over his face— as diough he disliked being reminded of a dead 
child. 

"It's not worth while to spend one's life grieving," said die 
Laplander. 

"I suppose it isn't." 

"Now I'm diinking of adopting anodier child. Don't you diink 
it would be a good idea?" 

"That depends on die child, Ola." 

"I will tell you what I know of die girl," said Ola. Then he told 
die fisherman diat around midsummer-time, two strange 
children— a boy and a girl— had come to the mines to look for dieir 
fadier, but as dieir fadier was away, they had stayed to await his 
return. While diere, die boy had been killed by a blast of rock. 

Thereupon Ola gave a beautiful description of how brave die 
litde girl had been, and of how she had won die admiration and 
sympadiy of every one. 

"Is diat the girl you want to take into your tent?" asked die 



fisherman. 

"Yes," returned die Lap. "When we heard her story we were 
all deeply touched and said among ourselves diat so good a sister 
would also make a good daughter, and we hoped diat she would 
come to us." 

The fisherman sat quiedy diinking a moment. It was plain diat 
he continued die conversation only to please his friend, die Lap. 

"I presume the girl is one of your race?" 

"No," said Ola, "she doesn't helong to die Samefolk." 

"Perhaps she's die daughter of some new settler and is 
accustomed to die life here?" 

"No, she's from the far soudi," replied Ola, as if this was of 
small importance. 

The fisherman grew more interested. 

"Then I don't helieve that you can take her," he said "It's 
douhtful if she could stand living in a. tent in winter, since she was 
not hrought up that way." 

"She will find kind parents and kind hrodiers and sisters in the 
tent," insisted Ola Serka. "It's worse to be alone dian to freeze." 

The fisherman became more and more zealous to prevent die 
adoption. It seemed as if he could not bear die diought of a child 
of Swedish parents being taken in by Laplanders. 

"You said just now diat she had a fadier in die mine." 

"He's dead," said die Lap abrupdy. 

"I suppose you have dioroughly investigated this matter, Ola?" 

"What's die use of going to all diat trouble?" disdained die 
Lap. "I ought to know! Would die girl and her brodier have been 
obliged to roam about die country if diey had a fadier living? 
Would two children have been forced to care for diemselves if 
they had a father? The girl herself diinks he's alive, but I say diat 
he must be dead." 

The man with the tired eyes turned to Ola. 

"What is die girl's name, Ola?" he asked. 

The mountaineer diought awhile, dien said: 

"I can't remember it. I must ask her." 

"Ask her! Is she already here?" 

"She's down at the camp." 

"What, Ola! Have you taken her in before knowing her 
fadier's wishes?" 

"What do I care for her father! If he isn't dead, he's probably 
die kind of man who cares nodiing for his child. He may be glad 
to have another take her in hand." 

The fisherman threw down his rod and rose widi an alertness 
in his movements diat bespoke new life. 

"I don't tiiink her father can be like odier folk," continued die 
mountaineer. "I dare say he is a man who is haunted by gloomy 
forebodings and dierefore can not work steadily. What kind of a 



father would that he for tire girl?" 

While Ola was talking tire fisherman started up tire strand. 

"Where are you going?" queried tire Lap. 

"I'm going to have a look at your foster-daughter, Ola." 

"Good!" said tire Lap. "Come along and nreet her. I drink 
you'll say drat she will he a good daughter to me." 

The Swede rushed on so rapidly drat dre Laplander could 
hardly keep pace widr him. 

After a moment Ola said to his companion: 

"Now I recall drat'her name is Osa— this girl I'nr adopting." 

The other man only kept hurrying along and old Ola Serka 
was so well pleased drat he wanted to laugh aloud. 

When drey came in sight of tire tents, Ola said a few words 
nrore. 

"She came here to us Samefolk to find her fadrer and not to 
hecome my foster-child. But if she doesn't find him, I shall be 
glad to keep her in my tent." 

The fisherman hastened all tire faster. 

"I might have known drat he would be alarmed when I 
drreatened to take his daughter into tire Laps' quarters," laughed 
Ola to himself. 

When tire man from Kiruna, who had brought Osa to the 
tent, turned back later in tire day, he had two people widr him in 
tire boat, who sat close togedrer, holding hands— as if drey never 
again wanted to part. 

They were Jon Lsserson and his daughter. Bodr were unlike 
what drey had been a few hours earlier. 

The father looked less bent and weary and his eyes were clear 
and good, as if at last he had found the answer to drat which had 
troubled him so long. 

Osa, dre goose girl, did not glance longingly about, for she had 
found some one to care for her, and now she could be a child 
again. 



XVI 
HOMEWARD BOUND! 

THE FIRST TRAVELING DAY 

Saturday, October first 

THL boy sat on tire goosey-gander's back and rode up amongst 
tire clouds. Sonre drirty geese, in regular order, flew rapidly 
soudrward. There was a rusding of feadrers and dre many wings 



beat the air so noisily that one could scarcely hear one's own 
voice. Akka from Kebnekaise flew in the lead; after her came 163 
and Kaksi, Kolme and Nelja, Viisi and Kuusi, Morten Goosey- 
Gander and Dunfin. The six goslings which had accompanied die 
flock die autumn before had now left to look after themselves. 
Instead, die old geese were taking with them twenty-two goslings 
diat had grown up in die glen diat summer. Eleven flew to die 
right, eleven to the left; and diey did dieir best to fly at even 
distances, like die big birds. 

The poor youngsters had never before been on a long trip and 
at first diey had difficulty in keeping up with die rapid flight. 

"Akka from Kebnekaise! Akka from Kebnekaise!" diey cried 
in plaintive tones. 

"What's die matter?" said die leader-goose sharply. 

"Our wings are tired of moving, our wings are tired of 
moving!" wailed die young ones. 

"The longer you keep it up, die better it will go," answered die 
leader-goose, widiout slackening her speed. And she was quite 
right, for when die goslings had flown two hours longer, diey 
complained no more of being tired. 

But in die mountain glen diey had been in die habit of eating 
all day long, and very soon diey began to feel hungry. 

"Akka, Akka, Akka from Kebnekaise!" wailed die goslings 
pitifully. 

"What's die trouble now?" asked die leader-goose. 

"We're so hungry, we can't fly any more!" whimpered die 
goslings. "We're so hungry, we can't fly any more!" 

"Wild geese must learn to eat air and drink wind," said die 
leader-goose, and kept right on flying. 

It actually seemed as if die young ones were learning to live on 
wind and air, for when diey had flown a litde longer, diey said 
nothing more about being hungry. 

The goose flock was still in die mountain regions, and die old 
geese called out die names of all die peaks as diey flew past, so 
diat die youngsters might learn diem. When diey had been calling 
out a while: 

"This is Porsotjokko, this is Sarjaktjokko, diis is Sulitelma," 
and so on, die goslings became impatient again. 

"Akka, Akka, Akka!" diey shrieked in heartrending tones. 

"What's wrong?" said the leader-goose. 

"We haven't room in our heads for any more of diose awful 
names!" shrieked die goslings. 

"The more you put into your heads die more you can get into 
diem," retorted die leader-goose, and continued to call out die 
queer names. 

The boy sat diinking diat it was about time the wild geese 
betook diemselves soudiward, for so much snow had fallen diat 



die ground was white as far as die eye could see. There was no use 
denying diat it had heen radier disagreeahle in die glen toward die 
last. Rain and fog had succeeded each odier widiout any relief, 
and even if it did clear up once in a while, immediately frost set in. 
Berries and mushrooms, upon which die hoy had subsisted during 
the summer, were eidier frozen or decayed. Finally he had been 
compelled to eat raw fish, which was something he disliked. The 
days had grown short and die long evenings and late mornings 
were radier tiresome for one who could not sleep die whole time 
that die sun was away. 

Now, at last, die goslings' wings had grown, so diat die geese 
could start for die soudi. The boy was so happy that he laughed 
and sang as he rode on die goose's back. It was not only on 
account of die darkness and cold diat he longed to get away from 
Lapland; diere were odier reasons too. 

The first weeks of his sojourn there die boy had not been die 
least bit homesick. He thought he had never before seen such a 
glorious country. The only worry he had had was to keep die 
mosquitoes from eating him up. 

The boy had seen very little of die goosey-gander, because die 
big, white gander diought only of his Dunfin and was unwilling to 
leave her for a moment. On die odier hand, Thumbietot had 
stuck to Akka and Gorgo, die eagle, and die diree of diem had 
passed many happy hours togedier. 

The two birds had taken him widi them on long trips. He had 
stood on snow-capped Mount Kebnekaise, had looked down at 
die glaciers and visited many high cliffs seldom tramped by human 
feet. Akka had shown him deep-hidden mountain dales and had 
let him peep into caves where modier wolves brought up their 
young. He had also made die acquaintance of die tame reindeer 
diat grazed in herds along die shores of the beautiful Torne Lake, 
and he had been down to the great falls and brought greetings to 
the bears that lived diereabouts from dieir friends and relatives in 
Westmanland. 

Ever since he had seen Osa, die goose girl, he longed for die 
day when he might go home widi Morten Goosey-Gander and be 
a normal human being once more. He wanted to be himself again, 
so diat Osa would not be afraid to talk to him and would not shut 
the door in his face. 

Yes, indeed, he was glad diat at last diey were speeding 
soudiward. He waved his cap and cheered when he saw die first 
pine forest. In die same manner he greeted die first gray cabin, the 
first goat, die first cat, and die first chicken. 

They were continually meeting birds of passage, flying now in 
greater flocks dian in die spring. 

"Where are you bound for, wild geese?" called die passing 
birds. "Where are you bound for?" 



"We, like yourselves, are going abroad," answered die geese. 

"Those goslings of yours aren't ready to fly," screamed die 
odiers. "They'll never cross the sea widi diose puny wings!" 

Laplander and reindeer were also leaving the mountains. 
When die wild geese sighted die reindeer, they circled down and 
called out: 

"Thanks for your company diis summer!" 

"A pleasant journey to you and a welcome back!" returned die 
reindeer. 

But when die bears saw the wild geese, diey pointed diem out 
to die cubs and growled: 

"Just look at diose geese; diey are so afraid of a little cold diey 
don't dare to stay at home in winter." 

But die old geese were ready widi a retort and cried to dieir 
goslings: 

"Look at diose beasts diat stay at home and sleep half die year 
rather dian go to die trouble of traveling soudi! " 

Down in die pine forest die young grouse sat huddled togedier 
and gazed longingly after die big bird flocks which, amid joy and 
merriment, proceeded soudiward. 

"When will our turn come?" diey asked the modier grouse. 

"You will have to stay at home widi mamma and papa," she 
said. 



XVII 
LEGENDS FROM HARJEDALEN 

Tuesday, October fourth 

THE boy had had three days' travel in die rain and mist and 
longed for some sheltered nook, where he might rest awhile. 

At last die geese alighted to feed and ease dieir wings a bit. To 
his great relief die boy saw an observation tower on a hill close by, 
and dragged himself to it. 

When he had climbed to die top of die tower he found a party 
of tourists diere, so he quickly crawled into a dark comer and was 
soon sound asleep. 

When the boy awoke, he began to feel uneasy because the 
tourists lingered so long in die tower telling stories. He diought 
diey w r ould never go. Morten Goosey-Gander could not come for 
him while diey were diere and he knew, of course, diat die wild 
geese w r ere in a hurry to continue die journey. In die middle of a 
story he diought he heard honking and die beating of wings, as if 
die geese were flying away, but he did not dare to venture over to 



die balustrade to find out if it was so. 

At last, when die tourists were gone, and die boy could crawl 
from his hiding place, he saw no wild geese, and no Morten 
Goosey-Gander came to fetch-him. He called, "Here am I, where 
are you?" as loud as he could, but his traveling companions did 
not appear. Not for a second did he diink diey had deserted him; 
but he feared that diey had met with some mishap and was 
wondering what he should do to find diem, when Bataki, the 
raven, lit beside him. 

The boy never dreamed diat he should greet Bataki with such 
a glad welcome as he now gave him. 

"Dear Bataki," he burst forth. "How fortunate diat you are 
here! Maybe you know what has become of Morten Goosey- 
Gander and die wild geese?" 

"I've just come with a greeting from diem," replied die raven. 
"Akka saw a hunter prowling about on the mountain and 
dierefore dared not stay to wait for you, but has gone on ahead. 
Get up on my back and you shall soon be with your friends." 

The boy quickly seated himself on die raven's back and Bataki 
would soon have caught up with the geese had he not been 
hindered by a fog. It was as if the morning sun had awakened it to 
life. Littie light veils of mist rose suddenly from the lake, from 
fields, and from die forest. They diickened and spread with 
marvellous rapidity, and soon die entire ground was hidden from 
sight by white, rolling mists. Bataki flew along above the fog in 
clear air and sparkling sunshine, but die wild geese must have 
circled down among the damp clouds, for it was impossible to 
sight diem. The boy and die raven called and shrieked, but got no 
response. 

"Well, diis is a stroke of ill luck!" said Bataki finally. "But we 
know diat diey are traveling toward die soudi, and of course I'll 
find diem as soon as die mist clears." 

The boy was distressed at die diought of being parted from 
Morten Goosey-Gander just now, when the geese were on die 
wing, and die big white one might meet with all sorts of mishaps. 
After Thumbietot had been sitting worrying for two hours or 
more, he remarked to himself diat, dius far, diere had been no 
mishap, and it was not wordi while to lose heart. 

Just dien he heard a rooster crowing down on the ground, and 
instandy he bent forward on die raven's back and called out: 

"What's die name of the country I'm traveling over?" 

"It's called Harjedalen, Harjedalen, Harjedalen," crowed die 
rooster. 

"How does it look down there where you are?" the boy asked. 

"Cliffs in die west, woods in die east, broad valleys across die 
whole country," replied the rooster. 

"Thank you," cried die boy. "You give a clear account of it." 



When they had traveled a little fardier, he heard a crow cawing 
down in the mist. 

"What kind of people live in diis country?" shouted the hoy. 

"Good, dirifty peasants," answered the crow. "Good, dirifty 
peasants." 

"What do they do?" asked die hoy. "What do diey do?" 

"They raise catde and fell forests," cawed die crow. 

"Thanks," replied die hoy. "You answer well." 

A hit fardier on he heard a human voice yodling and singing 
down in die mist. 

"Is diere any large city in this part of die country?" die boy 
asked. 

"What— what— who is it that calls?" cried die human voice. 

"Is diere any large city in this region?" die boy repeated. 

"I want to know who it is that calls," shouted die human voice. 

"I might have known diat I could get no information when I 
asked a human being a civil question," die boy retorted. 

It was not long before die mist went away as suddenly as it had 
come. Then die boy saw a beautiful landscape, with high cliffs as 
in Jamtland, but there were no large, flourishing settlements on the 
mountain slopes. The villages lay far apart, and the farms were 
small. Bataki followed the stream southward till they came within 
sight of a village. There he alighted in a stubble field and let the 
boy dismount. 

"In die summer grain grew on this ground," said Bataki. 
"Look around and see if you can't find something eatable." 

The boy acted upon die suggestion and before long he found 
a blade of wheat. As he picked out die grains and ate diem, Bataki 
talked to him. 

"Do you see diat mountain towering direcdy soudi of us?" he 
asked. 

"Yes, of course, I see it," said die boy. 

"It is called Sonfjallet," continued die raven; "you can imagine 
diat wolves were plentiful there once upon a time." 

"It must have been an ideal place for wolves," said die boy. 

"The people who lived here in die valley were frequendy 
attacked by diem," remarked die raven. 

"Perhaps you remember a good wolf story you could tell me?" 
said die boy. 

"I've been told diat a long, long time ago die wolves from 
Sonfjallet are supposed to have waylaid a man who had gone out 
to peddle his wares," began Bataki. "He was from Hede, a village 
a few miles down the valley. It was winter time and die wolves 
made for him as he was driving over die ice on Lake Ljusna. 
There were about nine or ten, and die man from Hede had a 
poor old horse, so diere was very little hope of his escaping. 

"When die man heard die wolves howl and saw how many 



there were after him, he lost his head, and it did not occur to him 
diat he ought to dump his casks and jugs out of the sledge, to 
lighten die load. He only whipped up die horse and made die hest 
speed he could, hut he soon ohserved diat die wolves were gaining 
on him. The shores were desolate and he was fourteen miles from 
the nearest farm. He diought diat his final hour had come, and 
was paralyzed widi fear. 

"While he sat there, terrified, he saw something move in die 
brush, which had been set in die ice to mark out die road; and 
when he discovered who it was that walked diere, his fear grew 
more and more intense. 

"Wild beasts were not coming toward him, but a poor old 
woman, named Finn-Malin, who was in die habit of roaming 
about on highways and byways. She was a hunchback, and slighdy 
lame, so he recognized her at a distance. 

"The old woman was walking straight toward die wolves. The 
sledge had hidden diem from her view, and die man 
comprehended at once diat, if he were to drive on widiout 
warning her, she would walk right into the jaws of the wild beasts, 
and while diey were rending her, he would have time enough to 
get away. 

"The old woman walked slowly, bent over a cane. It was plain 
that she was doomed if he did not help her, but even if he were to 
stop and take her into die sledge, it was by no means certain that 
she would be safe. More than likely the wolves would catch up 
with them, and he and she and the horse would all be killed. He 
wondered if it were not better to sacrifice one life in order that two 
might be spared— this flashed upon him die minute he saw die old 
woman. He had also time to think how it would be with him 
afterward— if perchance he might not regret that he had not 
succoured her; or if people should some day learn of die meeting 
and that he had not tried to help her. It was a terrible temptation. 

'"I would radier not have seen her,' he said to himself. 

"Just then die wolves howled savagely. The horse reared, 
plunged forward, and dashed past the old beggar woman. She, 
too, had heard die howling of die wolves, and, as the man from 
Hede drove by, he saw diat die old woman knew what awaited 
her. She stood motionless, her moutii open for a cry, her arms 
stretched out for help. But she neither cried nor tried to throw 
herself into the sledge. Somediing seemed to have turned her to 
stone. 'It was I,' diought die man. 'I must have looked like a 
demon as I passed.' 

"He tried to feel satisfied, now diat he was certain of escape; 
but at diat very moment his heart reproached' him. Never before 
had he done a dastardly tiling, and he felt now diat his whole life 
was blasted. 

'"Let come what may,' he said, and reined in die horse, 'I 



cannot leave her alone with the wolves!' 

"It was with great difficulty that he got the horse to turn, hut in 
the end he managed it and promptly drove hack to her. 

'"Be quick and get into the sledge,' he said gruffly; for he was 
mad with himself for not leaving the old woman to her fate. 

'"You might stay at home once in awhile, you old hag!' he 
growled. 'Now hoth my horse and I will come to grief on your 
account.' 

"The old woman did not say a word, hut the man from Hede 
was in no mood to spare her. 

"'The horse has already tramped thirty-five miles to-day, and 
the load hasn't lightened any since you got up on it!' he grumhled, 
'so that you must understand he'll soon he exhausted.' 

"The sledge runners crunched on the ice, but for all that he 
heard how the wolves panted, and knew that the beasts were 
almost upon him. 

'"It's all up with us!' he said. 'Much good it was, either to you 
or to me, this attempt to save you, Finn-Malin!' 

"Up to this point the old woman had been silent— like one who 
is accustomed to take abuse— but now she said a few words. 

'"I can't understand why you don't throw out your wares and 
lighten the load. You can come back again to-morrow and gather 
them up.' 

"The man realized that this was sound advice and was 
surprised that he had not thought of it before He tossed the reins 
to die old woman, loosed the ropes that bound the casks, and 
pitched them out. The wolves were right upon them, but now they 
stopped to examine that which was thrown on the ice, and the 
travelers again had the start of them. 

'"If this does not help you,' said the old woman, 'you 
understand, of course, that I will give myself up to the wolves 
voluntarily, that you may escape.' 

'"While she was speaking the man was trying to push a heavy 
brewer's vat from the long sledge. As he tugged at this he paused, 
as if he could not quite make up his mind to throw it out; but, in 
reality, his mind was taken up with something altogether different. 

'"Surely a man and a horse who have no infirmities need not 
let a feeble old woman be devoured by wolves for their sakes!' he 
thought. 'There must be some other way of salvation. Why, of 
course, there is! It's only my stupidity that hinders me from 
finding the way.' 

"Again he started to push the vat, then paused once more and 
burst out laughing. 

"The old woman was alarmed and wondered if he had gone 
mad, but the man from Hede was laughing at himself because he 
had been so stupid all the while. It was die simplest filing in die 
world to save all three of diem. He could not imagine why he had 



not thought of it before. 

'"Listen to what I say to you, Malin!' he said. 'It was splendid 
of you to be willing to throw yourself to the wolves. But you won't 
have to do diat because I know how we can all three be helped 
without endangering the life of any. Remember, whatever I may 
do, you are to sit still and drive down to Linsall. There you must 
waken die townspeople and tell diem diat I'm alone out here on 
die ice, surrounded by wolves, and ask diem to come and help 
me.' 

"The man waited until die wolves were almost upon the 
sledge. Then he rolled out die big brewer's vat, jumped down, and 
crawled in under it. 

"It was a huge vat, large enough to hold a whole Christmas 
brew. The wolves pounced upon it and bit at die hoops, but die 
vat was too heavy for them to move. They could not get at die 
man inside. 

"He knew that he was safe and laughed at die wolves. After a 
bit he was serious again. 

'"For the future, when I get into a tight place, I shall remember 
this vat, and I shall bear in mind that I need never wrong either 
myself or others, for there is always a third way out of a difficulty if 
only one can hit upon it.'" 

With this Bataki closed his narrative. 

The boy noticed that die raven never spoke unless there was 
some special meaning back of his words, and die longer he 
listened to him, die more thoughtful he became. 

"I wonder why you told me diat story?"remarked die boy. 

"I just happened to diink of it as I stood here, gazing up at 
Sonfjallet," replied die raven. 

Now diey had traveled fardier down Lake Ljusna and in an 
hour or so diey came to Kolsatt, close to die border of 
Halsingland. Here the raven alighted near a littie hut diat had no 
windows— only a shutter. From die chimney rose sparks and 
smoke, and from within die sound of heavy hammering was 
heard. 

"Whenever I see this smidiy," observed die raven, "I'm 
reminded that, in former times, diere were such skilled 
blacksmidis here in Harjedalen, more especially in diis village— 
diat diey couldn't be matched in die whole country." 

"Perhaps you also remember a story about diem?" said die 
boy. 

"Yes," returned Bataki, "I remember one about a smidi from 
Harjedalen who once invited two odier master blacksmidis— one 
from Dalecarlia and one from Vermland— to compete with him at 
nail-making. The challenge was accepted and die diree 
blacksmidis met here at Kolsatt. The Dalecarlian began. He 
forged a dozen nails, so even and smoodi and sharp diat diey 



couldn't be improved upon. After him came tire Vernrlander. He, 
too, forged a dozen nails, which were quite perfect and, moreover, 
he finished them in half tire time that it took tire Dalecarlian. 
When tire judges saw this they said to tire Harjedal smith that it 
wouldn't be worth while for him to try, since he could not forge 
better than tire Dalecarlian or faster than tire Vernrlander. 

'"I sha'n't give up! There nrust be still another way of 
excelling,' insisted tire Harjedal smith. 

"He placed the iron on tire anvil without heating it at tire forge; 
he simply hammered it hot and forged nail after nail, without the 
use of either anvil or bellows. None of tire judges had ever seen a 
blacksmith wield a hammer more masterfully, and tire Harjedal 
smith was proclaimed tire best in tire land." 

With these remarks Bataki subsided, and the boy grew even 
nrore thoughtful. 

"I wonder what your purpose was in telling nre that?" he 
queried. 

"The story dropped into my nrind when I saw the old smithy 
again," said Bataki in air offhand manner. 

The two travelers rose again into tire air and tire raven carried 
the boy southward till they came to Lillhardal Parish, where he 
alighted on a leafy mound at tire top of a ridge. 

"I wonder if you know upon what nround you are standing?" 
said Bataki. 

The boy had to confess that he did not know. 

"This is a grave," said Bataki. "Beneath this nround lies tire 
first settler in Harjedalen." 

"Perhaps you have a story to tell of him too?" said the boy. 

"I haven't heard much about him, but I think he was a 
Norwegian. He had served with a Norwegian king, got into his bad 
graces, and had to flee tire country. 

"Later he went over to tire Swedish king, who lived at Upsala, 
and took sendee with him. But, after a time, he asked for tire hand 
of tire king's sister in nrarriage, and when tire king wouldn't give 
him such a high-born bride, he eloped with her. By that time he 
had managed to get himself into such disfavor that it wasn't safe 
for him to live either in Norway or Sweden, and he did not wish to 
move to a foreign country. 'But there must still be a course open 
to me,' he drought. With his servants and treasures, he journeyed 
through Dalecarlia until he arrived in tire desolate forests beyond 
the outskirts of tire province. There he settled, built houses and 
broke up laird. Thus, you see, he was tire first nran to settle in this 
part of tire country." 

As tire boy listened to tire last story, he looked very serious. 

"I wonder what your object is in telling nre all this?" he 
repeated. 

Bataki twisted and turned and screwed up his eyes, and it was 



some time before he answered the boy. 

"Since we are here alone," he said finally, "I shall take this 
opportunity to question you regarding a certain matter. 

"Have you ever tried to ascertain upon what terms the elf who 
transformed you was to restore you to a normal human being?" 

"The only stipulation I've heard anything about was that I 
should take tire white goosey-gander up to Lapland and bring him 
back to Skane, safe and sound." 

"I thought as much," said Bataki; "for when last we nret, you 
talked confidently of there being nothing nrore contemptible than 
deceiving a friend who trusts one. You'd better ask Akka about 
the ternrs. You know, I dare say, that she was at your home and 
talked with the elf." 

"Akka hasn't told nre of this," said tire boy wonderingly. 

"She nrust have drought that it was best for you not to know 
just what tire elf did say. Naturally she would rather help you than 
Morten Goosey-Gander." 

"It is singular, Bataki, that you always have a way of making nre 
feel unhappy and anxious," said the boy. 

"I dare say it might seenr so, "continued tire raven, "but this 
time I believe that you will be grateful to nre for telling you that tire 
elf s words were to this effect: You were to beconre a normal 
human being again if you would bring back Morten Goosey- 
Gander that your mother might lay him on tire block and chop his 
head off." 

The boy leaped up. 

"That's only one of your base fabrications," he cried 
indignairdy. 

"You can ask Akka yourself," said Bataki. "I see her conring 
up there with her whole flock. And don't forget what I have told 
you to-day. There is usually a way out of all difficulties, if only one 
can find it. I shall be interested to see what success you have." 



XVIII 
VERMLAND AND DALSLAND 

Wednesday, October fifth 

TO-DAY tire boy took advantage of tire rest hour, when Akka was 
feeding apart fronr tire other wild geese, to ask her if that which 
Bataki had related was true, and Akka could not deny it. The boy 
nrade tire leader-goose pronrise that she would not divulge the 
secret to Morten Goosey-Gander. The big white gander was so 
brave and generous that he might do sonredring rash were he to 



learn of the elf s stipulations. 

Later the boy sat on the goose-back, glum and silent, and hung 
his head. He heard tire wild geese call out to the goslings that now 
they were in Dalarne, they could see Stadjan in tire north, and that 
now they were flying over Osterdal River to Horrmund Lake and 
were coming to Vesterdal River. But the boy did not care even to 
glance at all this. 

"I shall probably travel around with wild geese the rest of my 
life," he remarked to himself, "and I am likely to see more of this 
land than I wish." 

He was quite as indifferent when the wild geese called out to 
him that now they had arrived in Vermland and that the stream 
they were following southward was Klaralven. 

"I've seen so many rivers already," drought the boy, "why 
bother to look at one more?" 

Even had he been more eager for sight-seeing, there was not 
very much to be seen, for northern Vermland is nothing but vast, 
monotonous forest tracts, through which Klaralvan winds— narrow 
and rich in rapids. Here and there one can see a charcoal kiln, a 
forest clearing, or a few low, chimneyless huts, occupied by Finns. 
But the forest as a whole is so extensive one might fancy it was far 
up in Lapland. 



A LITTLE HOMESTEAD 

Thursday, October sixth 

The wild geese followed Klaralvan as far as the big iron 
foundries at Monk Fors. Then they proceeded westward to 
Fryksdalen. Before they got to Lake Fryken it began to grow 
dusky, and they lit in a little wet morass on a wooded hill. The 
morass was certainly a good night quarter for the wild geese, but 
the boy thought it dismal and rough, and wished for a better 
sleeping place. While he was still high in tire air, he had noticed 
that below the ridge lay a number of farms, and with great haste he 
proceeded to seek them out. 

They were farther away than he had fancied and several times 
he was tempted to turn back. Presently the woods became less 
dense, and he came to a road skirting the edge of the forest. From 
it branched a pretty birch-bordered lane, which led down to a 
farm, and immediately he hastened toward it. 

First the boy entered a farm yard as large as a city market-place 
and enclosed by a long row r of red houses. As he crossed the yard, 
he saw another farm where the dwelling-house faced a gravel path 
and a wide lawn. Back of the house there was a garden thick with 
foliage. The dwelling itself was small and humble, but the garden 



was edged by a row of exceedingly tall mountain-ash trees, so close 
together diat diey formed a real wall around it. It appeared to die 
boy as if he were coming into a great, high-vaulted chamber, widi 
die lovely blue sky for a ceiling. The mountain-ash were diick widi 
clusters of red berries, the grass plots were still green, of course, 
but that night there was a full moon, and as die bright moonlight 
fell upon die grass it looked as white as silver. 

No human being was in sight and die boy could wander freely 
wherever he wished. When he was in die garden he saw 
something which almost put him in good humour. He had 
climbed a mountain-ash to eat berries, but before he could reach a 
cluster he caught sight of a barberry bush, which was also full of 
berries. He slid along die ash branch and clambered up into die 
barberry bush, but he was no sooner there dian he discovered a 
currant bush, on which still hung long red clusters. Next he saw 
diat die garden was full of gooseberries and raspberries and dog- 
rose bushes; diat diere were cabbages and turnips in die vegetable 
beds and berries on every bush, seeds on die herbs and grain- 
filled ears on every blade. And diere on die padi— no, of course he 
could not mistake it— was a big red apple which shone in die 
moonlight. 

The boy sat down at the side of die padi, widi die big red 
apple in front of him, and began cutting little pieces from it widi 
his sheadi knife. 

"It wouldn't be such a serious matter to be an elf all one's life 
if it were always as easy to get good food as it is here," he tiiought. 

He sat and mused as he ate, wondering finally if it would not 
be as well for him to remain here and let die wild geese travel 
soudi widiout him. 

"I don't know for the life of me how r I can ever explain to 
Morten Goosey-Gander diat I cannot go home," thought he. "It 
would be better were I to leave him altogedier. I could gadier 
provisions enough for die winter, as well as die squirrels do, and if 
I were to live in a dark comer of die stable or die cow shed, I 
shouldn't freeze to deadi." 

Just as he was diinking this, he heard a light rustie over his 
head, and a second later somediing which resembled a birch 
stump stood on die ground beside him. 

The stump twisted and turned, and two bright dots on top of it 
glow r ed like coals of fire. It looked like some enchantment. 
However, die boy soon remarked that the stump had a hooked 
beak and big feadier wreadis around its glowing eyes. Then he 
knew diat this was no enchantment. 

"It is a real pleasure to meet a living creature," remarked die 
boy. "Perhaps you will be good enough to tell me die name of this 
place, Mrs. Brown Owl, and what sort of folk live here." 

That evening, as on all odier evenings, die owl had perched on 



a rung of the big ladder propped against die roof, from which she 
had looked down toward die gravel walks and grass plots, watching 
for rats. Very much to her surprise, not a single grayskin had 
appeared. She saw instead something diat looked like a human 
being, but much, much smaller, moving about in die garden. 

"That's the one who is scaring away die rats!" diought die owl. 
"What in die world can it be? It's not a squirrel, nor a kitten, nor a 
weasel," she observed. "I suppose diat a bird who has lived on an 
old place like this as long as I have ought to know about 
everydiing in die world; but diis is beyond my comprehension," 
she concluded. 

She had been staring at die object diat moved on die gravel 
padi until her eyes burned. Finally curiosity got the better of her 
and she flew down to the ground to have a closer view of die 
stranger. 

When die boy began to speak, die owl bent forward and 
looked him up and down. 

"He has neidier claws nor horns," she remarked to herself, 
"yet who knows but he may have a poisonous fang or some even 
more dangerous weapon. I must try to find out what he passes for 
before I venture to touch him." 

"The place is called Marbacka," said die owl, "and gentiefolk 
lived here once upon a time. But you, yourself, who are you?" 

"I diink of moving in here," volunteered die boy widiout 
answering die owl's question. "Would it be possible, do you 
diink?" 

"Oh, yes— but it's not much of a place now compared to what 
it was once," said die owl. "You can weadier it here I dare say. It 
all depends upon what you expect to live on. Do you intend to 
take up die rat chase?" 

"Oh, by no means!" declared die boy. "There is more fear of 
die rats eating me dian diat I shall do diem any harm." 

"It can't be diat he is as harmless as he says," thought die 
brown owl. "All die same I believe I'll make an attempt. ..." She 
rose into die air, and in a second her claws were fastened in Nils 
Holgersson's shoulder and she was trying to hack at his eyes. 

The boy shielded bodi eyes with one hand and tried to free 
himself with die odier, at die same time calling with all his might 
for help. He realized diat he was in deadly peril and diought diat 
diis time, surely, it was all over with him! 

Now I must tell you of a strange coincidence: The very year 
diat Nils Holgersson traveled with die wild geese diere w r as a 
woman who diought of writing a book about Sweden, which would 
be suitable for children to read in die schools. She had diought of 
diis from Christmas time until die following autumn: but not a line 
of die book had she WTitten. At last she became so tired of die 
whole tiling diat she said to herself: "You are not fitted for such 



work. Sit down and compose stories and legends, as usual, and let 
anodier write this book, which has got to be serious and 
instructive, and in which diere must not be one untruthful word." 

It was as good as setded diat she would abandon die idea. But 
she thought, very naturally, it would have been agreeable to write 
something beautiful about Sweden, and it was hard for her to 
relinquish her work. Finally, it occurred to her that maybe it was 
because she lived in a city, with only gray streets and house walls 
around her, that she could make no headway with die writing. 
Perhaps if she were to go into die country, where she could see 
woods and fields, diat it might go better. 

She was from Vermland, and it was perfecdy clear to her that 
she wished to begin the book witii that province. First of all she 
would write about the place where she had grown up. It was a little 
homestead, far removed from die great world, where many old- 
time habits and customs were retained. She diought diat it would 
be entertaining for children to hear of die manifold duties which 
had succeeded one anodier die year around. She wanted to tell 
diem how diey celebrated Christmas and New Year and Easter 
and Midsummer Day in her home; what kind of house furnishings 
diey had; what die kitchen and larder were like, and how die cow 
shed, stable, lodge, and badi house had looked. But when she was 
to write about it the pen would not move. Why this was she could 
not in die least understand; nevertheless it was so. 

True, she remembered it all just as distinctly as if she were still 
living in die midst of it. She argued witii herself diat since she was 
going into die country anyway, perhaps she ought to make a little 
trip to die old homestead diat she might see it again before writing 
about it. She had not been diere in many years and did not diink it 
half bad to have a reason for die journey. In fact she had always 
longed to be there, no matter in what part of die world she 
happened to be. She had seen many places diat were more 
pretentious and prettier. But nowhere could she find such comfort 
and protection as in die home of her childhood. 

It was not such an easy matter for her to go home as one might 
diink, for die estate had been sold to people she did not know. 
She felt, to be sure, diat diey would receive her well, but she did 
not care to go to die old place to sit and talk with strangers, for she 
wanted to recall how it had been in times gone by. That was why 
she planned it so as to arrive there late in die evening, when the 
day's work was done and die people were indoors. 

She had never imagined that it would be so wonderful to come 
home! As she sat in die cart and drove toward die old homestead 
she fancied diat she was growing younger and younger every 
minute, and diat soon she would no longer be an oldish person 
with hair diat was turning gray, but a little girl in short skirts with a 
long flaxen braid. As she recognized each farm along die road, she 



could not picture anything else than that everything at home would 
he as in hygone days. Her father and mother and brothers and 
sisters would he standing on the porch to welcome her; the old 
housekeeper would run to die kitchen window to see who was 
coming, and Nero and Freja and anodrer dog or two would come 
hounding and jumping up on her. 

The nearer she approached the place die happier she felt. It 
was autumn, which meant a busy time with a round of duties. It 
must have heen all these varying duties which prevented home 
from ever heing monotonous. All along the way die farmers were 
digging potatoes, and probably they would be doing likewise at her 
home. That meant that they must begin immediately to grate 
potatoes and make potato flour. The autumn had been a mild 
one; she wondered if everything in die garden had already been 
stored. The cabbages were still out, but perhaps die hops had 
been picked, and all die apples. 

It would be well if they were not having house cleaning at 
home. Autumn fair time was drawing nigh, everywhere die 
cleaning and scouring had to be done before die fair opened. That 
was regarded as a great event— more especially by die servants. It 
was a pleasure to go into the kitchen on Market Eve and see the 
newly scoured floor strewn with juniper twigs, the whitewashed 
walls and the shining copper utensils which were suspended from 
the ceiling. 

Even after the fair festivities were over there would not be 
much of a breathing spell, for then came die work on die flax. 
During dog days die flax had been spread out on a meadow to 
mould. Now it was laid in die old bath house, where the stove was 
lighted to dry it out. When it was dry enough to handle all die 
women in the neighbourhood were called together. They sat 
outside die bath house and picked die flax to pieces. Then they 
beat it with swingles, to separate the fine white fibres from die dry 
stems. As they worked, die women grew gray with dust; their hair 
and clothing were covered with flax seed, but they did not seem to 
mind it. All day die swingles pounded, and die chatter went on, so 
that when one went near the old bath house it sounded as if a 
blustering storm had broken loose there. 

After die work with the flax, came the big hardtack baking, the 
sheep shearing, and die servants' moving time. In November there 
were busy slaughter days, with salting of meats, sausage making, 
baking of blood pudding, and candle steeping. The seamstress 
who used to make up their homespun dresses had to come at this 
time, of course, and those were always two pleasant weeks— when 
the women folk sat together and busied themselves with sewing. 
The cobbler, who made shoes for the entire household, sat 
working at die same time in the men-servants' quarters, and one 
never tired of watching him as he cut the leather and soled and 



heeled die shoes and put eyelets in die shoestring holes. 

But die greatest rush came around Christmas time. Lucia 
Day— when die housemaid went ahout dressed in white, widi 
candles in her hair, and served coffee to everybody at five in die 
morning— came as a sort of reminder diat for die next two weeks 
diey could not count on much sleep. For now diey must brew die 
Christmas ale, steep die Christmas fish in lye, and do dieir 
Christmas haking and Christmas scouring. 

She was in die middle of die haking, with pans of Christmas 
huns and cooky platters all around her, when die driver drew in 
die reins at die end of die lane as she had requested. She started 
like one suddenly awakened from a sound sleep. It was dismal for 
her who had just dreamed herself surrounded hy all her people to 
he sitting alone in die late evening. As she stepped from die wagon 
and started to walk up die long lane diat she might come 
unohserved to her old home, she felt so keenly die contrast 
between dien and now diat she would have preferred to turn back. 

"Of what use is it to come here?" she sighed. "It can't be die 
same as in die old days!" 

On die odier hand she felt diat since she had traveled such a 
long distance, she would see die place at all events, so continued 
to walk on, aldiough she was more depressed with every step diat 
she took. 

She had heard diat it was very much changed; and it certainly 
was! But she did not observe diis now in die evening. She thought, 
radier, that everydiing was quite die same. There was die pond, 
which in her youdi had been full of carp and where no one dared 
fish, because it was father's wish diat die carp should be left in 
peace. Over diere were die men-servants' quarters, die larder and 
barn, with die farm yard bell over one gable and the weadier-vane 
over die odier. The house yard was like a circular room, with no 
outiook in any direction, as it had been in her fatiier's time— for he 
had not die heart to cut down as much as a bush. 

She lingered in die shadow under die big mountain-ash at the 
entrance to the farm, and stood looking about her. As she stood 
diere a strange tiling happened; a flock of doves came and lit 
beside her. 

She could hardly believe diat they were real birds, for doves 
are not in die habit of moving about after sundown. It must have 
been die beautiful moonlight that had awakened tiiese. They must 
have thought it was dawn and flown from dieir dove-cotes, only to 
become confused, hardly knowing where diey were. When they 
saw a human being diey flew over to her, as if she would set diem 
right. 

There had been many flocks of doves at die manor when her 
parents lived diere, for the doves were among die creatures which 
her father had taken under his special care. If one ever mentioned 



die killing of a dove, it put him in a bad humour. She was pleased 
diat die pretty birds had come to meet her in die old home. Who 
could tell but die doves had flown out in die night to show her 
diey had not forgotten diat once upon a time diey had a good 
home diere. 

Perhaps her father had sent his birds widi a greeting to her, so 
diat she would not feel so sad and lonely when she came to her 
former home. 

As she thought of diis, diere welled up within her such an 
intense longing for die old times diat her eyes filled widi tears. Life 
had been beautiful in this place. They had had weeks of work 
broken by many holiday festivities. They had toiled hard all day, 
but at evening diey had gathered around die lamp and read 
Tegner and Runeberg, "Fru " Lenngren and "Mamsell" Bremer. 
They had cultivated grain, but also roses and jasmine. They had 
spun flax, but had sung folk-songs as they spun. They had worked 
hard at dieir history and grammar, but diey had also played 
diearre and written verses. They had stood at die kitchen stove 
and prepared food, but had learned, also, to play die flute and 
guitar, die violin and piano. They had planted cabbages and 
turnips, peas and beans in one garden, but diey had anodier full of 
apples and pears and all kinds of berries. They had lived by 
diemselves, and this was why so many stories and legends were 
stowed away in dieir memories. They had worn homespun 
clodies, but diey had also been able to lead care-free and 
independent lives. 

"Nowhere else in die world do diey know how to get so much 
out of life as they did at one of diese little homesteads in my 
childhood!" she diought. "There was just enough work and just 
enough play, and every day there was a joy. How I should love to 
come back here again! Now diat I have seen die place, it is hard to 
leave it." 

Then she turned to die flock of doves and said to them— 
laughing at herself all die while: 

"Won't you fly to fatiier and tell him diat I long to come 
home? I have wandered long enough in strange places. Ask him if 
he can't arrange it so diat I may soon turn back to my childhood's 
home." 

The moment she had said this die flock of doves rose and flew 
away. She tried to follow diem widi her eyes, but diey vanished 
instantiy. It was as if die whole white company had dissolved in die 
shimmering air. 

The doves had only just gone when she heard a couple of 
piercing cries from die garden, and as she hastened diitiier she saw 
a singular sight. There stood a tiny midget, no taller dian a hand's 
breaddi, struggling widi a brown owl. At first she was so astonished 
diat she could not move. But when die midget cried more and 



more pitifully, she stepped up quickly and parted the fighters. The 
owl swung herself into a tree, hut the midget stood on the gravel 
path, without attempting either to hide or to run away. 

"Thanks for your help," he said. "But it was very stupid of you 
to let die owl escape. I can't get away from here, because she is 
sitting up in the tree watching me." 

"It was thoughtless of me to let her go. But to make amends, 
can't I accompany you to your home?" asked she who wrote 
stories, somewhat surprised to think that in this unexpected 
fashion she had got into conversation with one of the tiny folk. 
Still she was not so much surprised after all. It was as if all the 
while she had been awaiting some extraordinary experience, while 
she walked in the moonlight outside her old home. 

"The fact is, I had thought of stopping here over night," said 
the midget. "If you will only show me a safe sleeping place, I shall 
not be obliged to return to the forest before daybreak." 

"Must I show you a place to sleep? Are you not at home 
here?" 

"I understand that you take me for one of the tiny folk," said 
the midget, "but I'm a human being, like yourself, although I have 
been transformed by an elf." 

"That is the most remarkable tiling I have ever heard! 
Wouldn't you like to tell me how you happened to get into such a 
plight?" 

The boy did not mind telling her of his adventures, and, as the 
narrative proceeded, she who listened to him grew more and 
more astonished and happy. 

"What luck to run across one who has traveled all over 
Sweden on the back of a goose!" thought she. "Just this which he 
is relating I shall write down in my book. Now I need worry no 
more over that matter. It was well that I came home. To think that 
I should find such help as soon as I came to the old place!" 

Instantly another thought flashed into her mind. She had sent 
word to her father by the doves that she longed for home, and 
almost immediately she had received help in the matter she had 
pondered so long. Might not this be the father's answer to her 
prayer? 



XIX 
THE TREASURE ON THE ISLAND 

ON THEIR WAV TO THE SEA 

Friday, October seventh 

FROM die very start of the autumn trip the wild geese had flown 
straight south; hut when diey left Fryksdalen they veered in 
anodier direction, traveling over western Vermland and Dalsland, 
toward Bohuslan. 

That was a jolly trip! The goslings were now so used to flying 
that they complained no more of fatigue, and die hoy was fast 
recovering his good humour. He was glad that he had talked with 
a human being. He felt encouraged when she said to him that if he 
were to continue doing good to all whom he met, as heretofore, it 
could not end badly for him. She was not able to tell him how to 
get back his natural form, but she had given him a little hope and 
assurance, which inspired die boy to think out a way to prevent die 
big white gander from going home. 

"Do you know, Morten Goosey-Gander, that it will be rather 
monotonous for us to stay at home all winter after having been on 
a trip like this," he said, as they were flying far up in die air. "I'm 
sitting here thinking that we ought to go abroad with die geese." 

"Surely you are not in earnest!" said die goosey-gander. Since 
he had proved to die wild geese his ability to travel with them all 
the way to Lapland, he was perfectly satisfied to get back to the 
goose pen in Holger Nilsson's cow shed. 

The boy sat silently a while and gazed down on Vermland, 
where die birch woods, leafy groves, and gardens were clad in red 
and yellow autumn colours. 

"I don't think I've ever seen the earth beneath us as lovely as it 
is to-day!" he finally remarked. "The lakes are like blue satin 
bands." 

"Don't you think it would be a pity to settle down in West 
Vemmenhog and never see any more of the world?" 

"I thought you wanted to go home to your mother and father 
and show them what a splendid boy you had become?" said die 
goosey-gander. 

Af 1 summer he had been dreaming of what a proud moment it 
would be for him when he should alight in die house yard before 
Holger Nilsson's cabin and show Dunfin and the six goslings to 
the geese and chickens, die cows and die cat, and to Mother 
Holger Nilsson herself, so that he was not very happy over die 
boy's proposal. 



"Now, Morten Goosey-Gander, don't you think yourself diat it 
would be hard never to see anything more diat is beautiful!" said 
the boy. 

"I would radier see die fat grain fields of Soderslatt dian diese 
lean hills," answered die goosey-gander. "But you must know very 
well diat if you really wish to continue die trip, I can't be parted 
from you." 

"That is just the answer I had expected from you," said die 
boy, and his voice betrayed diat he was relieved of a great anxiety. 

Later, when diey traveled over Bohuslan, die boy observed 
diat die mountain stretches were more continuous, die valleys 
were more like little ravines blasted in die rock foundation, while 
die long lakes at their base were as black as if they had come from 
die under world. This, too, was a glorious country and as die boy 
saw it, widi now a strip of sun, now a shadow, he thought that 
diere was something strange and wild about it. He knew not why, 
but die idea came to him diat once upon a time diere were many 
strong and brave heroes in diese mystical regions who had passed 
through many dangerous and daring adventures. The old passion 
of wanting to share in all sorts of wonderful adventures awoke in 
him. 

"I might possibly miss not being in danger of my life at least 
once every day or two," he tiiought. "Anyhow it's best to be 
content widi tilings as diey are." 

He did not speak of diis idea to die big white gander, because 
die geese were now flying over Bohuslan widi all die speed diey 
could muster, and die goosey-gander was puffing so hard diat he 
would not have had die strength to reply. 

The sun was far down on the horizon, and disappeared every 
now and dien behind a hill; still the geese kept forging ahead. 

Finally, in die west, they saw a shining strip of light, which grew 
broader and broader with every wing stroke. Soon the sea spread 
before diem, milk white widi a shimmer of rose red and sky blue, 
and when diey had circled past die coast cliffs diey saw die sun 
again, as it hung over die sea, big and red and ready to plunge into 
die waves. 

As die boy gazed at die broad, endless sea and die red evening 
sun, which had such a kindly glow diat he dared to look straight at 
it, he felt a sense of peace and calm penetrate his soul. 

"It's not wordi while to be sad, Nils Holgersson," said die Sun. 
"This is a beautiful world to live in, bodi for big and litde. It is also 
good to be free and happy, and to have a great dome of open sky 
above you." 



THE GIFT OF THE WILD GEESE 

The geese stood sleeping on a little rock islet just beyond 
Fjallbacka. When it drew on toward midnight, and the moon hung 
high in the heavens, old Akka shook die sleepiness out of her 
eyes. After diat she walked around and awakened Yksi and Kaksi, 
Kolme and Nelja, Viisi and Kuusi, and, last of all, she gave 
Thumbietot a nudge widi her bill diat starded him. 

"What is it, Modier Akka?" he asked, springing up in alarm. 

"Nodiing serious," assured die leader-goose. "It's just this: we 
seven who have been long togedier want to fly a short distance out 
to sea to-night, and we wondered if you would care to come with 
us. 

The boy knew that Akka would not have proposed this move 
had diere not been somediing important on foot, so he prompdy 
seated himself on her back. The flight was straight west. The wild 
geese first flew over a belt of large and small islands near die coast, 
dien over a broad expanse of open sea, till they reached die large 
cluster known as die Vader Islands. All of diem were low and 
rocky, and in die moonlight one could see diat diey were radier 
large. 

Akka looked at one of die smallest islands and alighted diere. 
It consisted of a round, gray stone hill, with a wide cleft across it, 
into which die sea had cast fine, white sea sand and a few shells. 
As die boy slid from die goose's back he noticed somediing quite 
close to him diat looked like a jagged stone. But almost at once he 
saw that it was a big vulture which had chosen the rock island for a 
night harbour. Before die boy had time to wonder at die geese 
recklessly alighting so near a dangerous enemy, die bird flew up to 
diem and die boy recognized Gorgo, die eagle. 

Evidendy Akka and Gorgo had arranged die meeting, for 
neitiier of diem was taken by surprise. 

"This was good of you, Gorgo," said Akka. "I didn't expect 
diat you would be at die meeting place ahead of us. Have you 
been here long?" 

"I came early in die evening," replied Gorgo. "But I fear diat 
the only praise I deserve is for keeping my appointment with you. 
I've not been very successful in carrying out die orders you gave 
me. 

"I'm sure, Gorgo, that you have done more than you care to 
admit," assured Akka. "But before you relate your experiences on 
die trip, I shall ask Thumbietot to help me find somediing which 
is supposed to be buried on diis island." 

The boy stood gazing admiringly at two beautiful shells, but 
when Akka spoke his name, he glanced up. 

"You must have wondered, Thumbietot, why we turned out of 
our course to fly here to die West Sea," said Akka. 



"To be frank, I did diink it strange," answered tire boy. "But I 
knew, of course, that you always have sonre good reason for 
whatever you do." 

"You have a good opinion of me," returned Akka, "but I 
almost fear you will lose it now, for it's very probable that we have 
nrade diis journey in vain. 

"Many years ago it happened diat two of dre other old geese 
and myself encountered frightful stornrs during a spring flight and 
were wind-driven to diis island. When we discovered drat diere 
was only open sea before us, we feared we should be swept so far 
out drat we should never find our way back to land, so we lay 
down on dre waves between drese bare cliffs, where dre stornr 
compelled us to remain for several days. 

"We suffered terribly fronr hunger; once we ventured up to 
dre cleft on dris island in search of food. We couldn't find a green 
blade, but we saw a nunrber of securely tied bags half buried in die 
sand. We hoped to find grain in tire bags and pulled and tugged at 
drem till we tore tire clodr. However, no grain poured out, but 
shining gold pieces. For such tilings we wild geese had no use, so 
we left them, where they were. We haven't thought of the find in 
all these years; but this autumn something has come up to make 
us wish for gold. 

"We do not know that the treasure is still here, but we have 
traveled all this way to ask you to look into the matter." 

Willi a shell in either hand die boy jumped down into die cleft 
and began to scoop up the sand. He found no bags, but when he 
had made a deep hole he heard die clink of metal and saw that he 
had come upon a gold piece. Then he dug with his fingers and felt 
many coins in die sand. So he hurried back to Akka. 

"The bags have rotted and fallen apart," he exclaimed, "and 
die money lies scattered all through the sand." 

"That's well!" said Akka. "Now fill in die hole and smooth it 
over so no one will notice die sand has been disturbed." 

The boy did as he was told, but when he came up from die 
cleft he was astonished to see diat die wild geese were lined up, 
with Akka in the lead, and were marching toward him with great 
solemnity. 

The geese paused in front of him, and all bowed dieir heads 
many times, looking so grave that he had to doff his cap and make 
an obeisance to diem. 

"The fact is," said Akka, "we old geese have been diinking that 
if Thumbietot had been in die sendee of human beings and had 
done as much for diem as he has for us diey would not let him go 
widiout rewarding him well." 

"I haven't helped you; it is you who have taken good care of 
me," returned die boy. 

"We diink also," continued Akka, "diat when a human being 



has attended us on a whole journey he shouldn't be allowed to 
leave us as poor as when he came." 

"I know diat what I have learned diis year widi you is worth 
more to me dian gold or lands," said die boy. 

"Since diese gold coins have been lying unclaimed in die cleft 
all diese years, I diink diat you ought to have diem," declared die 
wild goose. 

"I diought you said something about needing diis money 
yourselves," reminded die boy. 

"We do need it, so as to be able to give you such recompense 
as will make your modier and fadier diink you have been working 
as a goose boy widi worthy people." 

The boy turned half round and cast a glance toward die sea, 
dien faced about and looked straight into Akka's bright eyes. 

"I diink it strange, Modier Akka, diat you turn me away from 
your service like diis and pay me off before I have given you 
notice," he said. 

"As long as we wild geese remain in Sweden, I trust diat you 
will stay widi us," said Akka. "I only wanted to show you where die 
treasure was while we could get to it without going too far out of 
our course." 

"All die same it looks as if you wished to be rid of me before I 
want to go," argued Thumbietot. "After all the good times we have 
had togedier, I think you ought to let me go abroad widi you." 

When die boy said this, Akka and die odier wild geese 
stretched dieir long necks straight up and stood a moment, widi 
bills half open, drinking in air. 

"That is some tiling I haven't thought about," said Akka, when 
she recovered herself. "Before you decide to come widi us, w r e 
had better hear wiiat Gorgo has to say. You may as well know diat 
when we left Lapland die agreement between Gorgo and myself 
was that he should travel to your home down in Skane to try to 
make better terms for you with the elf." 

"That is true," affirmed Gorgo, "but as I have already told you, 
luck was against me. I soon hunted up Holger Nilsson's croft and 
after circling up and down over die place a couple of hours, I 
caught sight of die elf, skulking along between die sheds. 

"Immediately I sw r ooped down upon him and flew off with 
him to a meadow where we could talk togedier widiout 
interruption. 

"I told him diat I had been sent by Akka from Kebnekaise to 
ask if he couldn't give Nils Holgersson easier terms. 

'"I only wish I could!' he answered, 'for I have heard diat he 
has conducted himself well on die trip; but it is not in my power to 
do so.' 

"Then I was wradiy and said diat I would bore out his eyes 
unless he gave in. 



'"You may do as you like,' he retorted, 'but as to Nils 
Holgersson, it will turn out exacdy as I have said. You can tell him 
from me diat he would do well to return soon with his goose, for 
matters on die farm are in a bad shape. His fadier has had to 
forfeit a bond for his brodier, whom he trusted. He has bought a 
horse widi borrowed money, and die beast went lame die first 
time he drove it. Since dien it has been of no eardily use to him. 
Tell Nils Holgersson diat his parents have had to sell two of die 
cows and diat diey must give up die croft unless they receive help 
from somewhere.'" 

When die boy heard diis he frowned and clinched his fists so 
hard diat die nails dug into his flesh. 

"It is cruel of die elf to make die conditions so hard for me 
diat I can not go home and relieve my parents, but he sha'n't turn 
me into a traitor to a friend! My fadier and modier are square and 
upright folk. I know diey would radier forfeit my help dian have 
me come back to tiiem with a guilty conscience." 



XX 
THE JOURNEY TO VEMMENHOG. 

Thursday, November third 

ONE day in die beginning of November die wild geese flew over 
Halland Ridge and into Skane. For several weeks diey had been 
resting on die wide plains around Falkoping. As many odier wild 
goose flocks also stopped diere, die grown geese had had a 
pleasant time visiting with old friends, and diere had been all kinds 
of games and races between the younger birds. 

Nils Holgersson had not been happy over die delay in 
Westergotiand, He had tried to keep a stout heart; but it was hard 
for him to reconcile himself to his fate. 

"If I were only well out of Skane and in some foreign land," he 
had diought, "I should know for certain diat I had nodiing to hope 
for, and would feel easier in my mind." 

Finally, one morning, the geese started out and flew toward 
Halland. 

In the beginning die boy took very littie interest in diat 
province. He diought diere was nodiing new to be seen diere. But 
when die wild geese continued die journey fardier soiith, along the 
narrow coasdands, die boy leaned over die goose's neck and did 
not take his glance from die ground. 

He saw die hills gradually disappear and the plain spread 
under him, at die same time he noticed diat die coast became less 



rugged, while the group of islands beyond thinned and finally 
vanished and the broad, open sea came clear up to firm land. 
Here diere were no more forests: here the plain was supreme. It 
spread all die way to die horizon. A land diat lay so exposed, widi 
field upon field, reminded die boy of Skane. He felt both happy 
and sad as he looked at it. 

"I can't be very far from home," he thought. 

Many times during the trip die goslings had asked die old 
geese: 

"How does it look in foreign lands?" 

"Wait, wait! You shall soon see," die old geese had answered. 

When die wild geese had passed Halland Ridge and gone a 
distance into Skane, Akka called out: 

"Now look down! Look all around! It is like diis in foreign 
lands." 

Just then diey flew over Soder Ridge. The whole long range of 
hills was clad in beach woods, and beautiful, turreted casdes 
peeped out here and diere. 

Among die trees grazed roe-buck, and on die forest meadow 
romped die hares. Hunters' horns sounded from die forests; die 
loud baying of dogs could be heard all die way up to die wild 
geese. Broad avenues wound dirough die trees and on diese ladies 
and gendemen were driving in polished carriages or riding fine 
horses. At the foot of the ridge lay Ring Lake with the ancient 
Bosjo Cloister on a narrow peninsula. 

"Does it look like this in foreign lands?" asked die goslings. 

"It looks exactiy like this wherever diere are forest-clad 
ridges," replied Akka, "only one doesn't see many of diem. Wait! 
You shall see how it looks in general." 

Akka lead die geese farther soudi to die great Skane plain. 
There it spread, with grain fields; with acres and acres of sugar 
beets, where die beet-pickers were at work; with low whitewashed 
farm and out houses; with numberless little white churches; with 
ugly, gray sugar refineries and small villages near die railway 
stations. Litde beach-encircled meadow lakes, each of diem 
adorned by its own stately manor, shimmered here and diere. 

"Now look down! Look carefully!" called die leader-goose. 
"Thus it is in foreign lands, from die Baltic coast all die way down 
to die high Alps. Fardier dian diat I have never traveled." 

When die goslings had seen die plain, die leader-goose flew 
down die Oresund coast. Swampy meadows sloped gradually 
toward die sea. In some places were high, steep banks, in odiers 
drift-sand fields, where die sand lay heaped in banks and hills. 
Fishing hamlets stood all along die coast, with long rows of low, 
uniform brick houses, with a lighdiouse at die edge of die 
breakwater, and brown fishing nets hanging in die drying yard. 

"Now look down! Look well! This is how it looks along die 



coasts in foreign lands." 

After Akka had been flying about in this manner a long time 
she alighted suddenly on a marsh in Vemmenhog township and 
die boy could not help thinking diat she had traveled over Skane 
just to let him see diat his was a country which could compare 
favourably widi any in die world. This was unnecessary, for die 
boy was not thinking of whether die country was rich or poor. 

From die moment diat he had seen die first willow grove his 
heart ached widi homesickness. 



XXI 
HOME AT LAST 

Tuesday, November eighth 

THE atmosphere was dull and hazy. The wild geese had been 
feeding on die big meadow around Skerup church and were 
having dieir noonday rest when Akka came up to die boy. 

"It looks as if w r e should have calm weadier for awhile," she 
remarked, "and I diink we'll cross die Baltic to-morrow." 

"Indeed!" said die boy abrupdy, for his throat contracted so 
diat he could hardly speak. All along he had cherished die hope 
diat he would be released from die enchantment while he was still 
in Skane. 

"We are quite near West Vemmenhog now," said Akka, "and 
I diought diat perhaps you might like to go home for awhile. It 
may be some time before you have anodier opportunity to see 
your people." 

"Perhaps I had better not," said die boy hesitatingly, but 
some tiling in his voice betrayed diat he was glad of Akka's 
proposal. 

"If die goosey-gander remains widi us, no harm can come to 
him," Akka assured. "I diink you had better find out how your 
parents are getting along. You might be of some help to them, 
even if you're not a normal boy." 

"You are right, Mother Akka. I should have diought of diat 
long ago." said die boy impulsively. 

The next second he and die leader-goose were on dieir way to 
his home. It was not long before Akka alighted behind die stone 
hedge encircling die littie farm. 

"Strange how natural everything looks around here!" die boy 
remarked, quickly clambering to die top of die hedge, so diat he 
could look about. 

"It seems to me only yesterday diat I first saw you come flying 



through die air." 

"I wonder if your father has a gun," said Akka suddenly. 

"You may he sure he has," returned die hoy. "It was just die 
gun diat kept me at home diat Sunday morning when I should 
have heen at church." 

"Then I don't dare to stand here and wait for you," said Akka. 
"You had hetter meet us at Smygahok early to-morrow morning, 
so diat you may stay at home over night." 

"Oh, don't go yet, Modier Akka!" begged die hoy, jumping 
from die hedge. 

He could not tell just why it was, hut he felt as if something 
would happen, eidier to die wild goose or to himself, to prevent 
dieir future meeting. 

"No douht you see diat I'm distressed hecause I cannot get 
hack my right form; hut I want to say to you diat I don't regret 
having gone widi you last spring," he added. "I would radier forfeit 
the chance of ever heing human again dian to have missed that 
trip." 

Akka hreadied quickly before she answered. 

"There's a little matter I should have mentioned to you before 
diis, but since you are not going back to your home for good, I 
diought diere was no hurry about it. Still it may as well be said 
now." 

"You know very well diat I am always glad to do your 
bidding," said die boy. 

"If you have learned anything at all from us, Thumbietot, you 
no longer think diat die humans should have die whole eardi to 
themselves," said the wild goose, solemnly. "Remember you have 
a large country and you can easily afford to leave a few bare rocks, 
a few shallow lakes and swamps, a few desolate cliffs and remote 
forests to us poor, dumb creatures, where we can be allowed to 
live in peace. All my days I have been hounded and hunted. It 
would be a comfort to know diat diere is a refuge somewhere for 
one like me." 

"Indeed, I should be glad to help if I could," said die boy, "but 
it's not likely that I shall ever again have any influence among 
human beings." 

"Well, we're standing here talking as if we were never to meet 
again," said Akka, "but we shall see each odier to-morrow, of 
course. Now I'll return to my dock." 

She spread her wings and started to fly, but came back and 
stroked Thumbietot up and down widi her bill before she dew 
away. 

It was broad daylight, but no human being moved on die farm 
and die boy could go where he pleased. He hastened to die cow 
shed, because he knew diat he could get die best information from 
die cows. 



It looked rather barren in their shed. In die spring diere had 
been diree fine cows there, but now there was only one— Mayrose. 
It was quite apparent diat she yearned for her comrades. Her head 
drooped sadly, and she had hardly touched die feed in her crib. 

"Good day, Mayrose!" said die boy, running fearlessly into her 
stall. 

"How are niodier and fadier? How are die cat and the 
chickens? What has become of Star and Gold-Lily?" 

When Mayrose heard die boy's voice she started, and 
appeared as if she were going to gore him. But she was not so 
quick-tempered now as formerly, and took time to look well at 
Nils Holgersson. 

He was just as little now as when he went away, and wore the 
same clothes; yet he was completely changed. The Nils 
Holgersson that went away in die spring had a heavy, slow gait, a 
drawling speech, and sleepy eyes. The one that had come back 
was lithe and alert, ready of speech, and had eyes that sparkled 
and danced. He had a confident bearing that commanded respect, 
little as he was. Although he himself did not look happy, he 
inspired happiness in others. 

"Moo!" bellowed Mayrose. "They told me that he was 
changed, but I couldn't believe it. Welcome home, Nils 
Holgersson! Welcome home! This is die first glad moment I have 
known for ever so long!" 

"Thank you, Mayrose!" said die boy, who was very happy to 
be so well received. 

"Now tell me all about father and niodier." 

"They have had nodiing but hardship ever since you went 
away," said Mayrose. "The horse has been a cosdy care all 
summer, for he has stood in die stable die whole time and not 
earned his feed. Your fadier is too soft-hearted to shoot him and 
he can't sell him. It was on account of die horse that both Star and 
Gold-Lily had to be sold." 

There was somediing else die boy wanted badly to know, "but 
he was diffident about asking die question point blank. Therefore 
he said: 

"Modier must have felt very sorry when she discovered diat 
Morten Goosey-Gander had flown?" 

"She wouldn't have worried much about Morten Goosey- 
Gander had she known die way he came to leave. She grieves 
most at die diought of her son having run away from home with a 
goosey-gander. " 

"Does she really diink diat I stole die goosey-gander?" said die 
boy. 

"What else could she diink?" 

"Fadier and niodier must fancy diat I've been roaming about 
die country, like a common tramp?" 



"They think that you've gone to the dogs," said Mayrose. 
"They have mourned you as one mourns die loss of die dearest 
diing on earth." 

As soon as the hoy heard diis, he rushed from the cow shed 
and down to die stahle. 

It was small, hut clean and tidy. Everything showed diat his 
fadier had tried to make die place comfortable for die new horse. 
In die stall stood a strong, fine animal that looked well fed and 
well cared for. 

"Good day to you!" said die hoy. "I have heard diat there's a 
sick horse in here. Surely it can't he you, who look so healthy and 
strong." 

The horse turned his head and stared fixedly at die hoy. 

"Are you die son?" he queried. "I have heard many had 
reports of him. But you have such a good face, I couldn't helieve 
diat you were he, did I not know diat he was transformed into an 
elf." 

"I know diat I left a had name behind me when I went away 
from die farm," admitted Nils Holgersson. "My own mother 
thinks I am a thief. But what matters it— I sha'n't tarry here long. 
Meanwhile, I want to know what ails you." 

"Pity you're not going to stay," said die horse, "for I have die 
feeling diat you and I might become good friends. I've got 
some tiling in my foot— the point of a knife, or something sharp— 
that's all that ails me. It has gone so far in that the doctor can't find 
it, but it cuts so that I can't walk. If you would only tell your father 
what's wrong with me, I'm sure that he could help me. I should 
like to be of some use. I really feel ashamed to stand here and 
feed without doing any work." 

"It's well that you have no real illness," remarked Nils 
Holgersson. "I must attend to this at once, so that you will be all 
right again. You don't mind if I do a little scratching on your hoof 
with my knife, do you?" 

Nils Holgersson had just finished, when he heard the sound of 
voices. He opened die stable door a little and peeped out. 

His father and mother were coming down die lane. It was easy 
to see that they were broken by many sorrows. His mother had 
many lines on her face and his father's hair had turned gray. She 
was talking with him about getting a loan from her brother-in-law. 

"No, I don't want to borrow any more money," his father said, 
as they were passing the stable. "There's nothing quite so hard as 
being in debt. It would be better to sell the cabin." 

"If it were not for the boy, I shouldn't mind selling it," his 
mother demurred. "But what will become of him, if he returns 
some day, wretched and poor— as he's likely to be— and we not 
here?" 

"You're right about that," the father agreed. "But we shall have 



to ask die folks who take the place to receive him kindly and to let 
him know diat he's welcome hack to us. We sha'n't say a harsh 
word to him, no matter what he may he, shall we modier?" 

"No, indeed! If I only had him again, so diat I could he certain 
he is not starving and freezing on die highways, I'd ask nodiing 
more! 

Then his father and modier went in, and the boy heard no 
more of dieir conversation. 

He was happy and deeply moved when he knew that they 
loved him so dearly, although they believed he had gone astray. 
He longed to rush into their arms. 

"But perhaps it would be an even greater sorrow were they to 
see me as I now am." 

While he stood there, hesitating, a cart drove up to die gate. 
The boy smothered a cry of surprise, for who should step from 
the cart and go into die house yard but Osa, the goose girl, and 
her father! 

They walked hand in hand toward die cabin. When they were 
about halfway there, Osa stopped her father and said: 

"Now remember, father, you are not to mention die wooden 
shoe or die geese or the little brownie who was so like Nils 
Holgersson that if it was not himself it must have had some 
connection with him." 

"Certainly not!" said Jon Esserson. "I shall only say that their 
son has been of great help to you on several occasions— when you 
were trying to find me— and diat therefore we have come to ask if 
we can't do diem a service in return, since I'm a rich man now and 
have more dian I need, thanks to die mine I discovered up in 
Lapland." 

"I know, fadier, diat you can say the right thing in die right 
way," Osa commended. "It is only that one particular tiling diat I 
don't wish you to mention." They w r ent into die cabin, and die boy 
would have liked to hear what diey talked about in diere; but he 
dared not venture near die house. It was not long before diey 
came out again, and his fadier and modier accompanied diem as 
far as die gate. 

His parents were strangely happy. They appeared to have 
gained a new hold on life. 

When die visitors were gone, fadier and modier lingered at 
die gate gazing after them. 

"I don't feel unhappy any longer, since I've heard so much 
diat is good of our Nils," said his modier. 

"Perhaps he got more praise dian he really deserved," put in 
his fadier dioughtfully. 

"Wasn't it enough for you diat diey came here specially to say 
diey wanted to help us because our Nils had served diem in many 
ways? I diink, fadier, diat you should have accepted dieir offer." 



"No, mother, I don't wish to accept money from an)' one, 
either as a gift or a loan. In die first place I want to free myself 
from all deht, dien we will work our way up again. We're not so 
very old, are we modier?" The fadier laughed heartily as he said 
this. 

"I helieve you think it will he fun to sell this place, upon which 
we have expended such a lot of time and hard work," protested 
the mother. 

"Oh, you know why I'm laughing," the father retorted. "It was 
the thought of the hoy's having gone to the bad that weighed me 
down until I had no strength or courage left in me. Now that I 
know he still lives and has turned out well, you'll see that Holger 
Nilsson has some grit left." 

The mother went in alone, and the boy made haste to hide in 
a corner, for his father walked into the stable. He went over to the 
horse and examined its hoof, as usual, to try to discover what was 
wrong with it. 

"What's this!" he cried, discovering some letters scratched on 
the hoof. 

"Remove the sharp piece of iron from the foot," he read and 
glanced around inquiringly. However, he ran his fingers along the 
under side of the hoof and looked at it carefully. 

"I verily believe there is something sharp here!" he muttered. 

While his father was busy with the horse and the boy sat 
huddled in a corner, it happened that other callers came to the 
farm. 

The fact was that when Morten Goosey-Gander found himself 
so near his old home he simply could not resist the temptation of 
showing his wife and children to his old companions on the farm. 
So he took Dunfin and the goslings along, and made for home. 

There was not a soul in the barn yard when the goosey-gander 
came along. He alighted, confidently walked all around die place, 
and showed Dunfin how luxuriously he had lived when he was a 
tame goose. 

When they had viewed die entire farm, he noticed that the 
door of die cow shed was open. 

"Look in here a moment," he said, "then you will see how I 
lived in former days. It was very different from camping in swamps 
and morasses, as we do now." 

The goosey-gander stood in die doorway and looked into die 
cow shed. 

"There's not a soul in here," he said. "Come along, Dunfin, 
and you shall see die goose pen. Don't be afraid; there's no 
danger." 

Forthwith die goosey-gander, Dunfin, and all six goslings 
waddled into die goose pen, to have a look at die elegance and 
comfort in which die big white gander had lived before he joined 



the wild geese. 

"This is die way it used to be: here was my place and over 
diere was die trough, which was always filled widi oats and water," 
explained die goosey-gander. 

"Wait! diere's some fodder in it now." Widi diat he rushed to 
the trough and began to gobble up die oats. 

But Dunfin was nervous. 

"Let's go out again!" she said. 

"Only two more grains," insisted die goosey-gander. The next 
second he let out a shriek and ran for die door, but it was too late! 
The door slammed, die mistress stood without and bolted it. They 
were locked in! 

The fadier had removed a sharp piece of iron from the 
horse's hoof and stood contentedly stroking die animal when die 
modier came running into die stable. 

'"Come, fadier, and see die capture I've made!" 

"No, wait a minute!" said die fadier. "Look here, first. I have 
discovered what ailed die horse." 

"I believe our luck has turned," said die modier. "Only fancy! 
die big white goosey-gander diat disappeared last spring must have 
gone off widi die wild geese. He has come back to us in company 
widi seven wild geese. They walked straight into the goose pen, 
and I've shut diem all in." 

"That's extraordinary," remarked die fadier. "But best of all is 
diat we don't have to think any more diat our boy stole die goosey- 
gander when he went away." 

"You're quite right, fadier," she said. "But I'm afraid we'll 
have to kill diem to-night. In two days is Morten Gooseda^ and 
we must make haste if we expect to get diem to market in time." 

"I diink it would be outrageous to butcher die goosey-gander, 
now diat he has returned to us widi such a large family," protested 
Holger Nilsson. 

"If times were easier we'd let him live; but since we're going to 
move from here, we can't keep geese. Come along now and help 
me carry diem into die kitchen," urged die modier. 

They went out together and in a few moments the boy saw his 
fadier coming along widi Morten Goosey-Gander and Dunfin— 
one under each arm. He and his wife went into die cabin. 

The goosey-gander cried: 

"Thumbietot, come and help me!"— as he always did when in 
peril— aldiough he was not aware diat die boy was at hand. 

Nils Holgersson heard him, yet he lingered at die door of die 
cow shed. 

He did not hesitate because he knew diat it would be well for 
him if die goosey-gander were beheaded— at diat moment he did 
not even remember diis— but because he shrank from being seen 
by his parents. 



"They have a hard enough time of it already," he thought. 
"Must I hring them a new sorrow?" 

But when the door closed on the goosey-gander, the boy was 
aroused. 

He dashed across the house yard, sprang up on the board 
walk leading to the entrance door and ran into the hallway, where 
he kicked off his wooden shoes in the old accustomed way, and 
walked toward the door. 

All the while it went so much against the grain to appear 
before his father and mother that he could not raise his hand to 
knock. 

"But this concerns the life of the goosey-gander," he said to 
himself— "he who has been my best friend ever since I last stood 
here." 

In a twinkling the boy remembered all that he and the goosey- 
gander had suffered on ice-bound lakes and stormy seas and 
among wild beasts of prey. His heart swelled with gratitude; he 
conquered himself and knocked on the door. 

"Is there some one who wishes to come in?" asked his father, 
opening the door. 

"Mother, you sha'n't touch the goosey-gander!" cried the boy.' 

Instantly both the goosey-gander and Dunlin, who lay on a 
bench with their feet tied, gave a cry of joy, so that he was sure 
they were alive. 

Some one else gave a cry of joy— his mother! 

"My, but you have grown tall and handsome!" she exclaimed. 

The boy had not entered the cabin, but was standing on the 
doorstep, like one who is not quite certain how r he will be 
received. 

"The Lord be praised that I have you back again!" said his 
mother, laughing and crying. "Come in, my boy! Come in!" 

"Welcome!" added his father, and not another word could he 
utter. 

But die boy still lingered at the threshold. He could not 
comprehend why they were so glad to see him— such as he was. 
Then his mother came and put her arms around him and drew 
him into the room, and he knew that he was all right. 

"Mother and father!" he cried. "I'm a big boy. I am a human 
being again!" 



XXII 
THE PARTING WITH THE WILD GEESE 

Wednesday, November ninth 

THE boy arose before dawn and wandered down to die coast. He 
was standing alone on die strand east of Sniyge fishing hamlet 
before sunrise. He had already been in die pen widi Morten 
Goosey-Gander to try to rouse him, but die big white gander had 
no desire to leave home. He did not say a word, but only stuck his 
bill under his wing and went to sleep again. 

To all appearances die weather promised to be almost as 
perfect as it had been diat spring day when die wild geese came to 
Skane. There was hardly a ripple on die water; die air was still and 
die boy thought of the good passage the geese would have. He 
himself was as yet in a kind of daze— sometimes thinking he was an 
elf, sometimes a human being. When he saw a stone hedge 
alongside die road, he was afraid to go fartiier until he had made 
sure diat no wild animal or vulture lurked behind it. Very soon he 
laughed to himself and rejoiced because he was big and strong and 
did not have to be afraid of anything. 

When he reached die coast he stationed himself, big as he 
was, at die very edge of die strand, so diat die wild geese could see 
him. 

It was a busy day for die birds of passage. Bird calls sounded 
on die air continuously. The boy smiled as he thought diat no one 
but himself understood what die birds were saying to one another. 
Presently wild geese came flying; one big flock following anodier. 

"Just so it's not my geese diat are going away widiout bidding 
me farewell," he diought. He wanted so much to tell diem how 
everytiiing had turned out, and to show diem that he was no 
longer an elf but a human being. 

There came a flock diat flew faster and cackled louder than 
die odiers, and somediing told him diat diis must be the flock, but 
now he was not quite so sure about it as he would have been die 
day before. 

The flock slackened its flight and circled up and down along 
die coast. 

The boy knew it was die right one, but he could not 
understand why die geese did not come straight down to him. 
They could not avoid seeing him where he stood. He tried to give 
a call that would bring diem down to him, but only diink! his 
tongue w r ould not obey him. He could not make die right sound! 
He heard Akka's calls, but did not understand what she said 

"What can this mean? Have die wild geese changed dieir 



language?" he wondered. 

He waved his cap to diem and ran along die shore calling: 

"Here am I, where are you?" 

But diis seemed only to frighten die geese. They rose and flew 
tardier out to sea. At last he understood. They did not know diat 
he was human, had not recognized him. He could not call diem to 
him hecause human heings can not speak die language of birds. 
He could not speak dieir language, nor could he understand it. 

Although the boy was very glad to be released from the 
enchantment, still he diought it hard diat because of diis he should 
be parted from his old comrades. 

He sat down on die sands and buried his face in his hands. 
What was die use of his gazing after diem any more? 

Presendy he heard die rustie of wings. Old modier Akka had 
found it hard to fly away from Thumbietot, and turned back, and 
now diat die boy sat quite still she ventured to fly nearer to him. 
Suddenly something must have told her who he was, for she lit 
close beside him. 

Nils gave a cry of joy and took old Akka in his arms. The 
odier wild geese crowded round him and stroked him widi dieir 
bills. They cackled and chattered and wished him all kinds of 
good luck, and he, too, talked to diem and thanked diem for die 
wonderful journey which he had been privileged to make in dieir 
company. 

All at once die wild geese became strangely quiet and withdrew 
from him, as if to say: 

"Alas! he is a man. He does not understand us: we do not 
understand him!" 

Then die boy rose and went over to Akka; he stroked her and 
patted her. He did die same to Yksi and Kaksi Kolme and Nelja, 
Viisi and Kuusi— die old birds who had been his companions from 
die very start. 

After diat he walked farther up die stand. He knew perfecdy 
well diat die sorrows of die birds do not last long, and he wanted 
to part widi diem while diey were still sad at losing him. 

As he crossed die shore meadows he turned and watched die 
many flocks of birds diat were flying over die sea. All were 
shrieking their coaxing calls— only one goose flock flew silendy on 
as long as he could follow it widi his eyes. The wedge was perfect, 
die speed good, and die wing sUokes sUong and certain. 

The boy felt such a yearning for his departing comrades diat 
he almost wished he were Thumbietot again and could travel over 
land and sea with a flock of wild geese. 



1 In Sweden die 10th of November is called Morten Gooseday and 
corresponds to the American Thanksgiving Day. 



